Are you ? Just click here:
Click here to sign the petition!
We do not share your email address without your permission. We will send you updates on this and other important campaigns by email. If at any time you would like to unsubscribe from our email list, you may do so.
Oppose PROTECT-IP Act: U.S. Government Wants To Censor Search Engines And Browsers
Tell Congress to Kill COICA 2.0, the Internet Censorship Bill
UPDATE:  Great news.  We don't always see eye-to-eye with Google, but we're on the same team this time.  Google CEO Eric Schmidt just came out swinging against PROTECT IP, saying, "I would be very, very careful if I were a government about arbitrarily  [implementing] simple solutions to complex problems." And then he went even further.  From the LA Times:
"If there is a law that requires DNSs, to do X and it's passed by both  houses of Congress and signed by the president of the United States and  we disagree with it then we would still fight it," he said, according to  the report. "If it's a request the answer is we wouldn't do it, if it's  a discussion we wouldn't do it."
Big content is irate.  The Motion Picture Association of America released a statement saying, "We’ve heard this ‘but the law doesn’t apply to me’ argument before – but   usually, it comes from content thieves, not a Fortune 500 company.  Google should know better."
ORIGINAL: We  knew that members of Congress and their business allies were gearing up  to pass a revised Internet Blacklist Bill -- which more than 325,000 Demand Progress members helped block last winter -- but we never expected it to be this atrocious.  Last  year's bill has been renamed the  "PROTECT IP" Act and it is far worse than its predecessor.  A summary of it is posted below.
Senators Leahy and Hatch pretended to weigh  free speech concerns as they revised the bill.  Instead, the new legislation would  institute a China-like censorship regime in the United States, whereby the Department of Justice could force search engines, browsers, and service  providers to block users' access to websites, and scrub the  American Internet clean of any trace of their existence.
Furthermore, it wouldn't just be the  Attorney General who could add sites to the blacklist, but the new bill would allow any copyright holder to get sites blacklisted -- sure to  result in an explosion of dubious and confused orders.
Will you urge Congress to oppose the PROTECT IP Act?  Just add your name at right. 
PETITION TO CONGRESS:  The PROTECT IP Act demonstrates an astounding lack of respect for Internet freedom and free speech rights.  I urge you to oppose it.
Just sign on at right and we'll forward the petition to Congress.
If you're already on Twitter, click here to tweet about the campaign: Tweet
 Here's the bill summary:
Paid for by Demand Progress (DemandProgress.org) and not authorized by any candidate or candidate's committee.
Contributions to Demand  Progress are not deductible as charitable contributions for federal income tax purposes.
