Q: What do you get when 48 ostriches have their heads in the sand?
A: More behind. : )  (think about it)
Sadly, on Tuesday, 48 ostriches (otherwise known as Senators) decided to keep their heads stuck in the sand by voting not to end the ridiculous $21 billion in tax breaks that go to Big Oil. According to Credo Action , a large part of the reason these lowly 48 voted as they did is that they have prostituted themselves for the almighty dollar.
“One big reason is oil money in our political process. A lot of it. Oil and gas companies spent $39.5 million lobbying congress in just the first quarter of this year, and have donated nearly $18 million directly to the political campaigns of Senators who voted against ending these subsidies — five times more than to Senators who supported ending them.”
SOURCE: Credo Action
To me, voting not to end these ridiculous subsides to Big Oil is tantamount to selling out our nation, for the following reasons:
These 48 ostriches have decided our nation’s paralyzing addiction to oil is more important than becoming free of its shackles.
Yet again, they have decided that more Americans must die in foreign lands so oil companies can maintain their obscene profits.
They have decided to assist those very corporations that have consistently placed roadblocks ahead of our nation’s transformation to a green economy.
They have decided to assist those very corporations whose products are one of the largest contributors to global warming and climate change – and by doing so have sentenced our children to a future filled with climatic challenges beyond imagination.
They have decided that only a precious few shall reap the rewards and riches, while the majority of us must squirm under their plutocratic thumb.
They have taken the easy way out (hiding their head in the sand) versus standing up to the real and significant challenges facing our nation.
They have placed self interest ahead of the common good.
These 48 selfish ostriches with their collective heads stuck in the sand should be voted out of their cozy trappings inside the beltway at the earliest possible opportunity. Please contact your United States Senator(s) and tell them to pull their head out of the sand and stop being an ostrich. While you are at it, you might mention that you are sick and tired of squirming under the oppressive thumb of Big Oil.
Share this:
