Video: Suspect dies while in the custody of Broward deputies
Second, a little background about my history with West. I met him only once, which was quite enough. My "Dueling Columnist" partner, Kingsley Guy, and I had been invited to debate at the Tower Forum in Fort Lauderdale . During the Q&A, no one stopped West from publicly telling me that, because of my political views, I was destroying the country.
He appointed himself judge and jury of my patriotism. No one made him write down his comments and hand them to someone else to censor or deliver Ñ as attendees at his "town hall" were required to do. No matter how subjective, offensive, or outrageous his comments were to me, no one muzzled him. He didn't hesitate to be confrontational. I told West that I would see to it that he wasn't elected to Congress, which of course I had no intention of doing Ñ because I don't engage in revenge journalism. We spoke civilly after the event.
West could have diffused tension when, ignoring his rules, Sandler spoke up. He could have listened to her, answered and then continued. Instead, he watched as she was handcuffed and taken away.
But the retired Army lieutenant colonel needs to get out of military mode and take a course in "How to handle objections," because he's in for opposition wherever he goes. His extremist voting record puts him at odds with most Americans, even most Republicans Ñ especially because he defends the GOP destruction of Medicare, the subject Sandler wanted clarified.
She, who lives in West's district, wonders why he doesn't. (He lives in Plantation and his member of Congress is Debbie Wasserman Schultz.) She also finds it odd that the Calvary Church, where he held the town hall she attended, isn't in his district.
West's handling of his town hall set in motion a shameful chain of events that is typical of today's divided America. But it's not too late for him to take the high road and acknowledge mistakes made in his name.
I have not discussed this with Sandler, but he would rise in everybody's estimation if he were big enough publicly to clear the air with her Ñ even give her the hearing she was denied at his town hall by being a guest on her radio program. I'm waiting for him to show me he's a bigger man than I have reason to believe he is.
Stephen L. Goldstein's commentaries appear on alternate Sundays. Email him at trendsman@aol.com .
