May 19, 2011 at 11:08 pm
Scott…I am glad you responded, and I will try to address your thoughts one at a time.
First, I used the Iraq War as a tool for expressing the scale of budget items to normal folks (i.e. those with jobs and families who don’t have the time to go line item by line item through the budget) versus a fairly typical and highly criticized social program. My criticism of that war was framed thus: “one war of suspicious origin, questionable motivation, and selective ethical foundation”. You disagreed with my assessment of that war with a stirring and utterly insulting analogy of my foreign policy knowledge to board games.
There were three pretexts for the war used to convince Congress to authorize the action; there were three, because the first two were quickly debunked. Ten years later, there has never been evidence linking Saddam with al-Qaeda (beyond one meeting between a junior member of the Baath Party and al-Qaeda functionaries), let alone anything linking him with 9/11; that is pretext number one. WMD’s were the second reason given to assault Iraq, despite our intelligence service’s declarations (as late as the summer of 2002) that Iraq had neither the weapons nor the capacity to produce them. The U.N. team on the ground concurred right up until the last minute, and were emphatically proven correct. So much for pretext number two. The third given reason for the invasion was regime change; that glorious source of operation code names that are packaged for general consumption. Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Those are the pretexts for invasion, and you don’t claim points Scott for your argument, regardless of how intriguing it is. You don’t because if, as you claim, the Iraq War was a gigantic misdirection play, then it certainly meets the standards of ethically questionable and suspicious.
But I am interested by your “foreign policy knowledge”. You make the almost unbelievable claim that the war was fought to put pressure on the Saudis and Iranians. Simply breathtaking; you should write a book (seriously). 5,000 lives lost (American, with many times that number of Iraqis killed) and $800 billion spent. You then claim that the ploy worked! Wow! The Saudis, first of all, have spent the last ten years aggressively funding the Wahabbism and the madrasas it is taught in (within Pakistan) that are the source of (most) radical jihadists. They also refused to allow U.S. investigators to trace terrorists cells through their financial transactions. They cracked down on factions within their kingdom that were threats to the royal family, not Americans. Resting your case on the actions of Saudi Arabia sir, is tantamount to admitting your case is without merit.
You are nearer the mark on the real reason for invading Iraq when you mention Iran; but it isn’t immediately obvious how that supports your initial criticism of my piece, or undermines my subsequent defense. The neo-conservatives behind the invasion of Iraq believed (and believe) that the power of the United States is best demonstrated via the military, and that that power should be used to uproot governments we see as a threat. Syria and Iran were logical next steps were the invasion of Iraq to go according to the plans that Rumsfeld and Cheney laid down. But the American people would never have supported them, so they lied. And so my point on the suspicious and unethical nature of Iraq is made.
Part of your argument Scott was an analogy you made (I am playing checkers and so can’t understand the chess Bush et. al. were playing, whilst you can).
If chess it be Scott, then were was the end-game? The neo-conservatives have never been capable of seeing more than a few moves into their future, which is why they contradict themselves so very often. They disregarded the real chess players in the Pentagon who told them they needed 250,000 troops, and they invaded a country without any notion of what to do if the people of that country turned against them (as people do when they are attacked.) They should go back to Chutes and Ladders.
As to finances Scott, this article was an exercise in scale analysis. I don’t like the media and conservative version of “economic reality”, because it doesn’t stand up to critical muster. All of their arguments inevitability rely on an economy constructed in a way that stands in absolute contradiction to the economy that led the 20th Century to be America’s Century. Most rank and file Americans miss the finer points of the argument because they don’t truly understand the scale of the budget; $600 million for Big Bird sounds like a lot, until you compare it to something that costs more by several orders of magnitude, and leaves a much more bitter taste in their mouthes.
Thanks again for the comments and have a great weekend!
scott
May 20, 2011 at 8:11 am
Hi Michael,
I guess I did not do a very good job of boiling down probably 5 books into a few paragraphs. For the full explanation of some of the concepts please start with either of these two books:
http://www.amazon.com/Americas-Secret-War-Worldwide-Struggle/dp/0767917855/ref=pd_rhf_p_t_2
Again, I think you need to step back from examining all these trees and consider the bigger picture. Like I mentioned, I think the strategy worked fine. Your response is regarding the details of how the military component was executed. I agree with you, the planners should have believed the generals and sent sufficient troops in (the Powell Doctrine).
If you want to focus on the talking-points pretexts, I think you miss that big picture. It would be just as easy for me to argue that no pretext is necessary given 1) the UN authorized military action against Iraq in 1991, 2) the 1991 Gulf War ended with a cease-fire, not a peace treaty, contingent on Iraq submitting to weapons inspections, and 3) in 2003, Iraq was in violation of the conditions of both the cease-fire and UN mandates. There was no need to get further authorization from the Congress or UN as Iraq effectively nullified the cease-fire and re-started hostilities. They had actually been doing this for over 10 years, routinely firing anti-air missiles at US fighters patrolling the no-fly zones. Instead of looking for pretexts, you should be asking why the heck didn’t Clinton recognize this violation and defacto state of war and do something about it?
Also, it always makes me laugh when I heard “neo-cons” too. You know of course that “neo” mean “new”. Guess what they were before? I can’t remember the book, but there are some good histories of where this group came from, largely pro-Israeli, liberal hawks. They were largely run out of Democratic party as it became more dovish in the Vietnam era. I see failed plans like Bush’s drug program for seniors as nothing more than another liberal give-away. There’s not much conservative about it, so referencing them as such is just a false term. I think they’re just still as liberal and hawkish as they were 40 years ago, but to really identify them as Republicans and conservative is inaccurate. Again, this using the standards I applied when evaluating the pretexts, it’s more important to analyse the actions and consequences than worrying about the words they’re using.
As for the financial aspects, I think we’re essentially agreeing. You just originally misunderstood my comment on what I see as likely. I did not have any nits to pick with the rest of your post or response. As an illustrative tool in scale analysis though, I obviously took exception to your characterization of the Iraq war. Without the snarky comments about justification or pretexts or whatever, I think the scale analysis is useful. But it’s not necessary to pit good versus evil to understand the scope/scale. From my point of view, it weakens your position (which I think is right) by perpetuating a falsehood or lack of big picture understanding and casting part of your scale in an incorrect light.
