tags: Arizona , politics
by Rick
Last week I stumbled across a story on MSNBC.com that some political leaders in Tucson and surrounding Pima County, Arizona are exploring the idea of becoming the nation’s 51st state . Tentatively named “Baja Arizona,” the state would only consist of what is now Pima County. Despite being one county, Pima County is still larger in area (9,186 square miles) than seven existing states like Rhode Island, Delaware, and Connecticut. The area under consideration was not originally part of what we now know as Arizona, but was annexed to the United States with the Gadsden Purchase in 1854 .
The drive behind this effort is that proponents no longer feel the conservative state government in Phoenix represents their values. Tucson is the home of the University of Arizona and is traditionally more liberal and progressive than other parts of the Grand Canyon State. Here is a weblink to the group’s Facebook page .
Judging by the hurdles and minefields proponents would have to cross to become a separate state under Arizona and federal law, one finds it hard to imagine a successful conclusion to such an effort. But, does the lack of ultimate success mean that they have failed? No, not at all. By voicing their concerns in such a manner they alert others in Arizona that not everyone supports the same radical right-wing philosophies. Perhaps, just perhaps, a few more moderate Republicans (if ther is such a thing anymore) in Phoenix will listen to the concerns being expressed in Tucson and reconsider their positions.
The other benefit of just talking about the subject is it enlightens those of us living outside of Arizona that not everyone in that state sings the same tune. “Do not lump us all together,” they are saying. Arizona may come across to many left-leaning and centerist Americans as “Aryanzona” lately due to its political actions and rhetoric, but that does not mean all of the state’s residents buy into or agree with the sorry and sad radical agendas festering in Phoenix.
proposed state flag of Baja Arizona
Share this:
