17 Responses to Lawrence O’Donnell Explains To Playboy How Keith Olbermann Created MSNBC
boil on May 15, 2011 at 5:40 pm
and dont forget in the beginning msnbc was supposed to be about the internet, and techy stuff. but msnbc still doesnt do the heavy lifting for the left, and wafts around the demographic map. and whats up with the weekend programming, the prison shows blow.
Jann Swanson on May 15, 2011 at 5:54 pm
When I watch Chris Matthews and The Young Turk I’m really not sure that MSNBC is leaning all that far forward.  While I agree with most of what The Young Turk is saying, I can hardly stand to listen to him say it and Matthews has just plain lost it.  It would be so wonderful to have an evening of programming from MSNBC good enough to attract non-liberals who might learn something.  As it is, O’Donnell and Rachel are carrying all of the water; the other two are driving people away.
FlippinUid on May 15, 2011 at 5:58 pm
Yes, and I think no matter what, after Keith on Current, we won’t be watching Soap on a Rope.
mommadona on May 15, 2011 at 6:49 pm
K.I.S.S. + Keith O = http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AKKqLl_ZEEY
Shiva on May 15, 2011 at 6:54 pm
the Glenn Beck interview was just plain outright crazy.
I any other hand like the Young Turk. I think he tells it like it is it is one of the few people on television that does it.  the problem with Lawrence and Chris Matthews, among others on other networks is that they need to know when to shut up. When Mrs. Rice was being interviewed the other day. I wanted to stand up and take a ball bat to Lawrence right along with her.  I just wanted to hear what she was going to say and he would not shut up
Olbermann did a good job and if he interviewed someone he at least occasionally listen to them. But I’m getting to the point that I can no longer watch MSNBC either. By the time Rachel comes on my fill of news has been had for the day
flo on May 15, 2011 at 7:56 pm
All well and good. Lawrence was trying to stop Rice from once again and for the thousandth time repeating the bush approved talking points. She is a wind up doll and he wouldn’t allow it…….
zumpie on May 15, 2011 at 8:29 pm
I’ve actually boycotted MSNBC since they canned Keith, because not only did he put them on the map, he was still the best thing there. I can’t wait until he starts on Current, I loves me some Keith!
Jay Jordan Hawke on May 16, 2011 at 7:40 am
Canned him?  I didn’t realize he had been fired.  I thought his leaving was a mutual break-up???
@FromTulsa on May 16, 2011 at 12:27 pm
Isn’t that like cutting off your nose to spite your face? Where do you go to get the truth now?
I was an ardent follower of KO, but also of TRMS. So now, I also follow Lawrence, and on occasion, Hardball. What else is there?
zumpie on May 16, 2011 at 3:17 pm
Hmm, first he was unfairly suspended then informed mid-show it would be his last–that’s definitely canning him. I really don’t think Keith would agree to something so unprofessional, it had suck some Comcast overlord dick written all over it.
I now get my info from from the intertubes, natch—including FOK News!!!
Shiva on May 16, 2011 at 3:36 pm
I beg to differ. Keith Olbermann will be the first to admit that he was trying to get out of his contract for over a year. He was in negotiations to get out of it at the time. The negotiations were fruitful and he knew before he went on the air that it was his last show. Read the transcripts of his last show
Carrie Larson on May 15, 2011 at 8:54 pm
I just plain miss Keith Olberman and I guess that Lawrence is right, he did turn MSNBC around. I do remember Tucker Carlson and some other programming they had. I actually like all the shows on MSNBC, my favorite is still Hard Ball. Everyone of the shows on MSNBC I know I can trust to tell me the truth. They are all very well researched programs.
diz on May 16, 2011 at 4:09 am
Haven’t had a confirmation of how those of us without extended cable will subscribe or receive Keith’s new show.  Hope an internet feed is available because I enjoy seeing him rather than just reading his words.  Keith is the Murrow for our days and Rachel is up there too.  I applaud Cenk and Big Ed for their passion and support of the working and middle class. We need them as cheerleaders for the cause as well.
The problem for the progressive and left media will come down to revenue.  With the Murdoch empire and the Koch billions, right wing radio and tv will always be heavily underwritten.  I peek in at network news on occasion and am always surprised by what is missing in the news cycle.  My neighbor only watches network news and had no idea that Trump was running his mad hatter mouth so much.  It was barely touched by MSM media.  Not that he had anything to say but they weren’t getting the true and complete picture of the dangers inherent in allowing Trump to have any leverage in the political arena.  His celeb name recognition gave a lot of uninformed people all they needed and thereby be deluded into thinking he was a viable candidate.
Thankfully the internet has provided us with a continuing array of progressive voices that can’t be shouted down.  What we will need to do is figure out how to compensate them fairly to make it possible and worthwhile for them to continue their dedication short of hawking gold coins or kissing big bucks butt.
Patrick Lawler on May 16, 2011 at 12:56 pm
Keith O is undoubtedly the king, although the commentators on MSNBC do a fine job as well. I like Chris Matthews but do agree that he tends to interrupt people too much. Some of his guests are actually trying to prove a point that he himself made, and it’s like they have to do verbal combat with him to get a word in edgewise. He is a good host though.
Michael S. Levinson on May 16, 2011 at 5:03 pm
Michael Stephen Lev in son is an independent write-in candidate for president. He brings to the table a magnum opus work of art that stems from the heart, a prophetic Television Scripture hand lettered on the page, in double columns, 112 pages deep, rivaling Dante, of Divine Comedic fame, and old blind Homer, this time around, for whirled wide television, on all channels for all the worlds peoples at once, dusk until dawn, with every line a delicate sensible rhyme.
The other candidates aren’t presenting their Vehicle for World Peace for you to have a test drive, or innovative solutions, for example a med-care program that will cost half of what the on-the-take Congress came up with, cover everyone in the whole country within six weeks, and for long term success, requires only a one line change in the tax code.
The other candidates aren’t pointing out that BP finally located the seam all the drillers with their ten thousand Gulf of Mexico oil wells were drilling for, the seam that leads to as much oil as in all of Saudi Arabia including all the oil there since first barrel spouted 70 years ago.
The other candidates aren’t talking about nationalizing all the oil wells in the Gulf of Mexico, for National Security reasons and then earmarking the asset for three things, to start: returning the Gulf of Mexico to ecologic health, that we owe that much to Mother Nature;
picking up the tab on all the real estate taxes being paid by all the homeowners nationwide;
and free higher education for all who qualify, especially for doctors and dentists and all related personal to break the supply demand issue so medical care is available and affordable for all.
The poet author of an inspired prophetic work brings dozens more of innovative solutions for every prob limb but to the issue of World Peace whirled pizza beginning with a peaceful night and all man kind doing the same thing at the same time – watching the poet prophet tell his vision, the issue is – is this man fun to listen to. For that, see and hear the story – your story – of Adman and Even in the Gar Den ov Edum.
You should know where you stand within six minutes.
Tim Russert black balled the poet last election so producers could not invite him on. NBC will not allow any show to invite him. But with Keith Olbermann not beholden to NBC there is a real possibility you will see and hear the man who created a program for genuine peace.
Shiva on May 16, 2011 at 5:08 pm
That would be very interesting. If you are tracking this could you let us know any show updates?
Michael S. Levinson on May 16, 2011 at 5:06 pm
