-
House GOP to Democrats: Stop Telling the Public About Our Unpopular Agenda
A wide variety of House Republicans, especially freshmen in  competitive districts, heard from their constituents over the recent  two-week break, and discovered that voters aren’t impressed with the GOP  plan to end Medicare. Yesterday, they gathered to deliver a message to Democrats: Stop making us look bad by telling the public about our agenda.
A group of House Republican freshmen, tired of getting  hammered on Medicare, is leading a fresh protest against Democrats’ tactics on the senior citizen health care program.
Rep. Adam Kinzinger sent a letter to the White House Tuesday  signed by 41 of his classmates “calling on President Obama to end the ‘MediSCARE’ tactics,” according to a release today.
This is amusing for a couple of reasons. The first is that the  whining about “scare tactics” continues to be foolish. If Dems were  lying and engaging in demagoguery, then Republicans would be right to  call them on it. But the criticism of the GOP plan from Democrats and  the left has been accurate — the point is to simply let Americans know what Republicans intend to do.
If the GOP’s Medicare proposal is frightening the public, the problem  isn’t with Democratic rhetoric; it’s with the Republican plan.
But the other angle to keep in mind is recent history. In 2010 — just  last year — many of these same freshmen managed to get elected by using  wildly misleading attack ads accusing Democrats of hurting seniors and “cutting” Medicare.
In other words, those who suddenly find themselves deeply troubled by “MediSCARE tactics” are in Congress today because of “MediSCARE  tactics.”
This was not entirely lost on the GOP freshmen at yesterday’s press  conference, and some of the Republicans in attendance said they want to “ wipe the slate clean ” and “hit the reset button” now that they’re in office.
Well, isn’t that convenient.
It’s as if Republicans hit Democrats with a baseball bat, over and  over again, for about a year. Now that Dems, bloodied and bruised, have  managed to get their hands on a bat, they’re hearing Republicans  proclaim, “Let’s all agree that hitting people with bats is wrong.”
Nevertheless, the GOP whining on this suggests the Democratic message — which, unlike the GOP’s attack ads from last year, happens to be  accurate — is causing some real headaches for the Republican Party.
By Steve Benen |                                     Sourced from Washington Monthly
