One Man's Crusade Against Fundamentalist Claptrap
Photo: Lianne Milton
May/June 2011 Issue
In a dusty living room in Petaluma, California, on a sawhorse table next to a Franklin stove, is the aging computer whose dial-up connection serves as William J. Bennetta's link to the outside world. From here the 72-year-old former journalist and biologist has been running the Textbook League , a one-man nonprofit that has dissected schoolbooks for factual errors, from typos in the periodic table of elements to flawed explanations of how airplanes fly. "I go after bullshit no matter whence it comes," he tells me.
In recent years, though, Bennetta's work has been used primarily to go after a very specific kind of "bullshit"—references to Islam in school textbooks that conservatives find especially offensive. His research has been cited approvingly by Phyllis Schlafly and white supremacist groups. Last fall, religious conservatives on the Texas State Board of Education voted to cleanse the state's social-studies books of "pro-Islamic/anti-Christian bias," citing Bennetta's research ( PDF ). (He'd criticized a seventh-grade history book that presented the life of Muhammad and other "Muslim religious tales and religious beliefs as matters of historical fact.")
Advertise on MotherJones.com
The irony is that Bennetta's primary crusade—the one that spurred him  to start the League back in 1989—has been against junk science and "creationist claptrap." His battles with intelligent-design advocates earned him a fellowship at San Francisco's California Academy of  Sciences . So how'd the religious right come to embrace this  barrel-chested, pipe-smoking heretic? For one, Bennetta rankles at the  idea that the beliefs of any religion might be presented to schoolkids  as facts; he's also criticized the "fake 'history' of Jesus and  Christianity" in schoolbooks as "fundamentalist propaganda."
So how'd the religious right come to embrace this barrel-chested, pipe-smoking heretic?
More than a decade ago, Susan Haughton, a self-professed social  conservative who sat on Alabama's social-studies textbook committee,  came across Bennetta's research. She asked him to critique three  high-school world history books, which he did, finding them full of "errors, misconceptions, contradictions, and confused passages." His  complaints had nothing to do with religion. Far from it: His main  concerns were the books' overly simple explanations of scientific  discoveries by Einstein, Darwin, Galileo, and the ancient Greeks. No  matter; he'd played right into Haughton's hands. "It is no secret that  any attempt to defeat textbooks or get offensive books off required  reading lists is typically met with loud and inflammatory accusations of  censorship," she later wrote on RestoringAmerica.org . Her solution:  Attack the books as factually inaccurate. The Textbook League "is most  definitely not a right-wing or conservative organization," she wrote. "Instead, it is an apolitical organization solely dedicated to the  improvement of textbooks, which is why it is uniquely valuable as a  credible source." The tactic worked, and Alabama purged its classrooms  of the books.
Right-wing groups are now hip to this game. In February, the Florida  Textbook Action Team organized protests against "pro-Islamic,  anti-Judeo/Christian bias" in several textbooks that will come up for  review later this year. The group insisted, as Haughton did in Alabama,  that its motivation is fact-based. "This protest is NOT Anti-Islamic," it said in a press release. "We are working to ensure that our children  learn from textbooks that are accurate, factual, unbiased, and  truthful."
Of course, a more direct approach works, too. Last year in Texas, the  education board members who cited Bennetta's work counted up references  to Muslim and Christian beliefs in three social-studies books to  support their allegations of pro-Islam bias. One book, they said,  included twice as many favorable lines about Islam than Christianity.  Those critics "all come from the Christian side," Bennetta says. "They're all upset Christianity doesn't get the attention and respect  and blah blah blah." The Texans never contacted him, and Bennetta says  he has no interest in opposing them. "I don't give a shit. When I  publish something, it's out there. Let them do what they want with it."
This spring, poor health and scarce funds forced Bennetta to shutter  the Textbook League. Yet he's content to hole up in his clapboard house,  far beyond the fray. "You have [Glenn] Beck and all those guys saying  whatever they're saying this week. If you look in the textbooks, you see  something very similar," he says. "What these people do is create a  past that never existed and relate it to a present that doesn't exist." That's why this erudite, lifelong science buff spent 22 years  watchdogging religious groups—even though he was powerless to keep them  from hijacking his work. "Nature doesn't lie," he says. "Men do."
Adam Weinstein is Mother Jones' copy editor. For more of his stories, click here or follow him on Twitter . Get Adam Weinstein's RSS feed .
