National Embarrassment Sarah Palin Doesn’t Know How Gas Prices Work
May 9, 2011
In a recent appearance on Fox Business, Sarah Palin tried to blame Obama for the rise in gas prices, but she embarrassed herself with reasoning that revealed that she has no idea how gas prices really work.
Here is the video:
Sarah Palin accused Obama of intentionally manipulating the price of energy, “But rising gas prices — there is an inherent link, David, between energy and security, energy and prosperity, and energy and freedom, and this is something that obviously our president doesn’t understand because he’s doing all that he can to manipulate the U.S. supply of energy. He is diminishing and decreasing the amount of energy in our market domestically and that, of course, resulting in prices that are rising and gas having doubled since he has been in office.”
She continued, “He’s absolutely on the wrong track. So, you have the rising cost of energy and you have the job situation, which is proving that his agenda towards some social engineering, some manipulation of the marketplace, is not working.”
Sarah Palin is claiming gas prices have not gone down because Obama won’t drill baby drill. Apparently Sarah Palin doesn’t understand the energy market at all or else she would know that the idea that we can drill our way to lower gas prices is a myth.
There are two problems with drill baby drill. According to a 2007 US Energy Information Administration study even if we drilled in every available area of the United States, it would not change the price of a barrel of oil, “The projections in the OCS access case indicate that access to the Pacific, Atlantic, and eastern Gulf regions would not have a significant impact on domestic crude oil and natural gas production or prices before 2030. Leasing would begin no sooner than 2012, and production would not be expected to start before 2017. Total domestic production of crude oil from 2012 through 2030 in the OCS access case is projected to be 1.6 percent higher than in the reference case, and 3 percent higher in 2030 alone, at 5.6 million barrels per day. For the lower 48 OCS, annual crude oil production in 2030 is projected to be 7 percent higher—2.4 million barrels per day in the OCS access case compared with 2.2 million barrels per day in the reference case (Figure 20). Because oil prices are determined on the international market, however, any impact on average wellhead prices is expected to be insignificant.”
In short, the US can’t produce enough oil to influence the price in the global market.
This leads us to the second fallacy in Sarah Palin’s argument that the oil drilled here in the US stays here. The oil that is extracted from the US belongs to the oil companies, not the US. All oil that is drilled for here goes on to the market and adds to the global supply. The oil companies are free to sell it to whoever they want. On top of this, that the US uses over 19 million barrels of oil per day. It produces 5.5 million barrels of oil a day.
If we were to follow Palin’s advice we could add another 2.4 million barrels of oil a day, which would cut our daily oil deficit to over 11 million barrels a day in 2030. Since our consumption is constantly increasing, any oil we would produce would be offset by increased consumption with the result being that drill baby drill does nothing to help the price of gas.
There is nothing that any president can do to lower short term gas prices. Because America consumes more than it produces, we have no choice but to continue our dependence on foreign oil. If the US keeps doing what it is doing, it will always be vulnerable to global oil market price spikes. The only way to not suffer from $4 a gallon gas is to use less oil, and the way to use less oil is through the development of alternative energy.
Sarah Palin’s drill baby drill was debunked in 2008, but this hasn’t stopped her from trotting out her placebo of an energy solution every time she is given the chance . Palin is supposed to be an energy expert, but she doesn’t understand how global energy markets work. Her criticisms of Obama were childish and ridiculous to anyone who doesn’t buy into the lazy man’s fantasy that we can drill our way out of this problem.
Sarah Palin is an energy expert who doesn’t understand where the price of gas comes from. How much longer is she going to continue to embarrass herself on the national stage? Palin has a toddler’s grasp of energy policy, yet she continues to hang on to her White House delusions.
Just like Sarah Palin herself, drill baby drill is an idea that is stale and past its sell by date.
26 Responses to National Embarrassment Sarah Palin Doesn’t Know How Gas Prices Work
english saddle on May 9, 2011 at 1:11 pm
Payme is no energy expert. Another payme lie! “Toddlers grasp” was perfect.
Anne on May 9, 2011 at 2:14 pm
She is no expert on anything except grifting and bilking gullible people.  I’d like someone to give me just ONE example in which she didn’t prove to be a “national embarrassment.”
AFM on May 9, 2011 at 3:16 pm
She is good at screwing you know.  After all she has had 5 kids or so.  She is a good little republican breeder.  No wonder people at the other end of the economic ladder vote for her.  Oh wait I’m lower middle class and I sure wouldn’t vote for her to be a dog catcher. She is an evil,evil liar.
Brian Daniels on May 9, 2011 at 4:25 pm
She has five kids? I thought it was four and one miracle baby. You know, the one she gave birth to after flying the plane back from Texas herself. The truly miraculous thing to me is that you can’t embarrass her. She gets caught in a lie or other stupidity and goes blissfully on babbling. Amazing!
Dorothy Rissman on May 9, 2011 at 7:26 pm
Perfect word.  She is a grifter.  That woman is dumb and conniving. She is very dangerous.  I am still stunned that millions of American’s see her as a hero.
majii on May 9, 2011 at 8:01 pm
I’ve been following her signature energy accomplishment, ACES, on the Anchorage Daily News site and other web sites in AK.  The AK legislature wants to overturn it because the extra tax it imposed on the energy companies is causing them to shrink from making further investments in the state.  There was quite a dust up between Gov. Parnell and the state senate a couple weeks ago when Parnell wanted to give subsidies to an oil company with NO guarantee of AK receiving anything in return for the investment.  As usual, it looks as though Palin left a mess for someone else to clean up when she quit as governor the same as she did after her stint as mayor of Wasilla.
Shiva on May 9, 2011 at 1:27 pm
this is hilarious. First she said she did a study and there was no collusion, and then she turns around and says, yet we put a bunch of people in prison for collusion. Hello?
how is Obama manipulating the price of fuel? by investigating fraudulent practices? I think not.
Sarah has a particularly nice position. She can say she is part of the tea party and in doing so she is admitting that Bush evidently manipulated the price of oil. Which was a total fallacy just like her saying that Obama is manipulating it.
I don’t think Sarah should be talking about oil or the White House. She is obviously totally nuts.
BeeEss on May 9, 2011 at 2:35 pm
I am so sick of this false meme that Palin went after corruption and put people in prison. SHE DID NOT! The Feds did! It just happened when she was governor. She and her administration had nothing to do with it. I hear this all the time, even from people here in Alaska.
drpatois on May 9, 2011 at 1:28 pm
Unfortunately, her peeps believe her.
SHEL3364 on May 9, 2011 at 1:55 pm
Didn’t we go through this in 2008?
Has time stood still for the former half-term Governor?  (Good Lord, she thanked President Bush for OBL’s demise)
p.s. Does anyone else see the similarities between OBL in his house in Pakistan, recording messages in his private studio for his minions, viewing them to make sure he looks “just right” and then releasing them to the public….
and Sarah Palin in her house in Alaska, recording messages in her private studio for her minions, viewing them to make sure she looks “just right” and then releasing them to the public??
Just wonderin’
Dragonpuff on May 9, 2011 at 2:23 pm
lol
Poor,stupid Sarah.  Her followers are the worst kind of paste eaters.
Anne on May 9, 2011 at 8:31 pm
Yes,it has stood still for her.  She is still seething with anger and disbelief 2.5 years after she and McCain were soundly defeated.  That’s one of the reasons she speaks with such disdain and dislike for President Obama, and being paid for it makes it even better for her.  I believe she has a hard time coming down from the high she experienced with her first anti-Obama snarkfest at the Republican Convention on Wednesday, September 3, 2008.  Every screechfest since then has been a variation of that first one. But of course, she’s too self-unaware to grasp how she contributed to that loss or why her unfavorable ratings are much higher now than they were then.
Troy on May 9, 2011 at 3:46 pm
You can’t fix Stupid.
Diane on May 10, 2011 at 7:15 am
ditto.
She quit that oil and gas job too!
Why would anybody trust her?
People with an education, don’t!
[...] More here: National Embarrassment Sarah Palin Doesn't Know How Gas Prices Work [...]
Lilybart on May 9, 2011 at 4:38 pm
So even if we Nationalized the oil business, kept our own oil for our own National refineries, we still couldn’t supply our own needs. So there is no way out of this except ALTERNATIVE energy sources. And India and China and other developing counties will have more cars soon as well, so more people chasing less gas, no matter where it is drilled.
diz on May 9, 2011 at 4:54 pm
If she and Trump could just get the ‘head guy’ at OPEC on the phone and demand that he lower oil prices…… Wouldn’t he just laugh them off and remind them that they too are among the greedy crowd arguing that free enterprise and deregulation rules all?  How dare they suggest that the oil barons be denied their continually rising windfall profits.   $P manages to sell her home made snake-oil at around $100K per hour and few in the cartel challenge her prices.
I’m beginning to think Mrs P has more confidence in the President than she screeches as she believes a mere snap of his fingers could change every problem facing our Nation.
DannyEastVillage on May 9, 2011 at 5:35 pm
why does Fox give so much air time to someone with an IQ of 83?
Dorothy Rissman on May 9, 2011 at 7:31 pm
Sarah and Doosey are two of the dumbest people I have ever had the misfortune of being introduced to.
g bolen on May 9, 2011 at 10:17 pm
83? You think too highly of her!
JustNosy on May 9, 2011 at 6:46 pm
Commodity trading’s impact shouldn’t be overlooked. It plays a big roll in gas/oil prices that isn’t discussed enough – probably because it is a very complicated subject to cover. Google contango+oil for more info.
FauxPalin on May 9, 2011 at 11:21 pm
Whew!  That was pure tortue just listening to her ranting voice again.
neil on May 10, 2011 at 12:29 am
Funny I never heard screech when gas was 4.50 a gallon and the shrub was the chump in chief.These people have that damn short term memory loss.Must be substance abuse.
Joe Beppo on May 10, 2011 at 4:55 am
Sarah to Fox doofus host #99-”Obamacare, centralized government, overreach, speculators, Obamacare, drill baby drill, Maverick,government intervention, socialist, terrorist, i’m a rogue, elisitist, pit bull hockeymom, socialists, socialist germany, socialist spain, torture works on Todd, lamestream media, katie couric sucks, our great military, muslim exteremist osama, i read somethings and the great republican free market guys in the debate (there was a debate?)…..thanks Fox guy…you betcha”. I’m out!!!
RF Schatten on May 14, 2011 at 2:52 pm
What do you expect?…remember, this is a woman, that asked her daughter…in a hotel room, to go into Google, and, find whatever she could…about the subject, that she was about to speak, in front of a group…at a dinner, downstairs at that hotel…20 minutes later!!!
Dan Skinner on May 18, 2011 at 1:45 am
To quote Comic Boy Guy from the Simpson’s , “Stupidest Person EVER!”
