Walker and Kasich define irony with “appreciation” proclamations
Governors Scott Walker (R-WI) and John Kasich (R-OH) have set off firestorms for their bare-knuckled assault on workers’ rights. That’s why even the most conservative observers had to do a double-take and ask “is this from The Onion?” when both governors declared similar “appreciation days” for state workers.
In Wisconsin :
Gov. Scott Walker issued a proclamation Wednesday to declare May 4, 2011, State Employee Recognition Day in Wisconsin.
In the proclamation, Walker said state employees provide many necessary services to the people of Wisconsin, and praised their hard work.
“Wisconsin’s public servants are recognized as an invaluable resource, assisting countless residents on a daily basis in every county across the state,” he wrote.
And in Ohio :
Gov. John Kasich really likes public employees, at least enough to issue a proclamation on Monday making this week “Public Service Appreciation Week.”
“This week I ask all Ohioans to reflect on all that our public employees do in our communities and thank them for the invaluable work they do each day,” Kasich said in a press release.
First impression? This is just mind-blowing hypocrisy. Scott Walker is showing his superficial “appreciation” while at the same time scheming to  jam his collective bargaining bill through the back door to avoid the courts. John Kasich is issuing his proclamation just weeks after stripping workplace rights from 350,000 of those very workers he is now “appreciating.”
The nearly simultaneous and suspiciously similar proclamations from two of the nation’s most anti-worker figures do prove one thing: these guys are ultimately politicians in the strictest sense of the word. Their actions show that they actually think very poorly of public workers, but they know if they issue some proclamations and pay some lip service every once in a while, they can appear favorably to the all too many voters that aren’t paying close attention.
Credit where credit is due – Scott Walker and John Kasich are both slick, smooth-talking political operators. That’s how they have gotten this far. It’s up to each of us to spread the word to our friends and family that true appreciation means you get to keep your rights, and that everything else is lipstick on a very ugly, very insidious pig.
