2011.06.01
First grandma, now your kids.
H.R. 1939 would roll back safety standards in the 2008 Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act -- including lead safety standards in children's toys.  Republicans do remember kids getting sick off toys from China that had lead in them, do they not?  And that's not all:  H.R. 1939 would also gut the Consumer Product Safety Commission's public database -- because why would you want to know what toys are dangerous to your children? -- and even undermine crib safety rules in child care centers.  Do they, like, want to hurt children or something?  Republicans serve one master and one master only:  the corporation.  They do not care about the economy, they do not care about the deficit, and they certainly don't care about the small business, the hostage they always parade in front of you when you criticize them.  Oh sure, they'll say safety regulations kill jobs and that corporations can't be made to do anything in times of economic trouble, but that marks them as people who won't do hard work in tough times, the most worthless sort of people.  So Consumers Union helps you demand a semblance of humanity from your Reps .  Seriously, voting for H.R. 1939 should be as toxic as voting to destroy Medicare.
Meanwhile, the Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood helps you fight state bills allowing advertising on school buses .  Why?  Because kids already watch too damn much advertising on TV, and corporations toss around terms like brand extension too readily when talking about advertising to children.  Worse, corporations interfere with the parents' right to ensure a good education for their child, and now they're using (hard to believe, Harry!) state budget troubles as a way to get their crappy products into the minds of kids.  Some of the bills you'll see described at the above link, I'll admit, would prevent sexual material and alcohol/tobacco advertising in school bus ads, but let's not give people too much credit.  And, ah, let's note that other bills don't -- Kentucky's bill, for example, has literally no proscription against sexual material in school bus ads.  And let's also note that none of the bills listed prohibit junk food ads.  If there's something in the world worse than a crappy plastic toy made by slave labor, it's junk food.  (You can find action tools for individual states on the right-hand side of the above link.)
Posted at 06:44 AM in action | Permalink
