-
The Republican Death Wish: The 2012 Election Is Going to Be All About Medicare
Polls show an overwhelming majority of Americans -- even a majority of Republican voters -- want to preserve Medicare.
May 26, 2011  |  
Advertisement
 
Forty Senate Republicans joined their  colleagues in the House to support Paul Ryan’s plan that would turn  Medicare into vouchers that funnel money to private health insurers.  They thumbed their nose at the special election in upstate New York  earlier this week that delivered a victory to Democrat Kathy Hochul, who  made the plan the focus of her upset victory.
So now it’s official. The 2012 campaign will be about the future of  Medicare. (Yes, it will also be about jobs, but the Republicans haven’t  come up with any credible ideas on that front, and the Democrats seem  incapable of doing what needs to be done.)
This spells trouble for the GOP. Polls show an overwhelming majority  of Americans — even a majority of Republican voters — want to preserve  Medicare. They don’t want to turn it over to private insurers.
It would be one thing if Republicans had consistency on their side.  At least then they could take the high road and claim their plan is a  principled way to achieve the aims of Medicare through market-based  mechanisms. (It isn’t, of course. It would end up squeezing seniors  because it takes no account of the rising costs of health care.)
But they can’t even claim consistency. Remember, this was the same  GOP that attacked the President’s health-reform plan in 2010 by warning  it would lead to Medicare cuts.
Former President Bill Clinton counsels Democrats not to say Medicare  is fine the way it is. He’s right. But instead of talking about Medicare  as a problem to be fixed, Democrats should start talking about it as a  potential solution to the challenge of rising health-care costs — as  well as to our long-term budget problem.
Can we be clear about that budget problem? It’s not driven by  Medicare. It’s driven by the same relentlessly soaring health-care costs  that are pushing premiums through the roof and causing middle-class  families to shell out more and more money for deductibles and  co-payments.
Some features of Obama’s new healthcare law will slow the rise — insurance exchanges, for example, could give consumers clearer  comparative information about what they’re getting for their insurance  payments — but the law doesn’t go nearly far enough.
That’s why Democrats should be proposing that anyone be allowed to  sign up for Medicare. Medicare is cheaper than private insurance because  its administrative costs are so much lower, and it has vast economies  of scale.
If Medicare were allowed to use its potential bargaining leverage  over America’s hospitals, doctors, drug companies, and medical  providers, it could drive down costs even further.
And it could force the nation’s broken health-care system to do  something it must do but has resisted with a vengeance: Focus on healthy  outcomes rather on costly inputs. If Medicare paid for results — not  tests, procedures, drugs, and hospital stays, but results — it could  give Americans better health at lower cost.
Let the GOP go after Medicare. That will do more to elect Democrats  in 2012 than anything else. But it would be wise and politically astute  for Democrats to go beyond just defending Medicare. Strengthen and build  upon it. Use it to reform American health care and, not incidentally,  rescue the federal budget.
Robert B. Reich has served in three national administrations, most recently as secretary of labor under President Bill Clinton. He also served on President Obama's transition advisory board. His latest book is Aftershock: The Next Economy and America's Future. His homepage is www.robertreich.org.
1
