On BigGovernment.com , known serial liar and corporate hack Andrew Breitbart and friends have cooked up another Shirley Sherrod style attack on a Democrat, this time NY House Rep Anthony Weiner.
Hacked or hung?
Rep. Anthony Weiner (D-NY 9?) finds himself in a late night online pickle.
This evening a photo surfaced on Congressman Weiner’s yfrog account and in his verified Twitter timeline of a man in his underwear with an erection. The photo was reportedly sent to a woman on Twitter. We’ve protected her name and her account, which was at one time verified to be active but has since been deleted after the photo in question was deleted. Coincidentally, the rest of the photos in the congressman’s alleged yfrog account were also deleted around 11 p.m. eastern.
The picture in question is of a guy in his underwear with a boner. No face is shown.
I smell bullshit.
UPDATE: Rawstory.com is now calling this "easily debunked fraud"
LOL! Get popcorn!
More below the fold
Congressman Weiner claims that his Twitter account was hacked. Since I believe in innocence until proven guilty, I will give Congressman Weiner the benefit of the doubt for now.
But Andrew Breitbart and his cohorts don't get that benefit of a doubt. They have been proven guilty several times over during their brief history of smear campaigns and misleadingly re-edited videos. Think Shirley Sherrod . Think ACORN . In short, Andrew Brietbart is a sleazy fucking liar.
     Andrew Breitbart's sole purpose of existence is to get rich by smearing the enemies of the Republican party and the special interests whom they serve. If Andrew Breitbart told me that it was raining outside I would open a window to verify it for myself. I don't trust him any farther than I can throw Sarah Palin's $150,000 wardrobe .
    So now that we see who Brietbart and his horde of flying monkeys have chosen as his new target my question to you is "What are we gonna do about it?". With his history of lying his ass off and the American Press's long history of NEVER FACT CHECKING CONSERVATIVES (ugghh!) I am hoping that those of us online can try to verify or debunk these claims. Anyone want to give it a try? The corporate media long ago gave up on fact checking these Breitbart scandals before it claims the career of opponents of the right wing, so it looks like we are going to have to do it ourselves.
Any help in verifying or debunking this story will be greatly appreciated.
And remember, Breitbart is a sleazy piece of shit. Nothing would make me happier than debunking his too often falsified claims before they get onto the Drudge Report and into the Villagers heads.
UPDATE: Busted Brietbart FAKED IT (try and act surprised)
The pic isn't fake, but the screen grab of Congressman Weiner's twitter page was fake. What bullshit!
hat tip to Kossack Eileen B
Forensic analysis of the screen grab shows...
big shock: it's been manipulated. Not the yfrog photo, but the SCREEN GRAB itself that Brietbart is posting as "proof."
What was altered? The name "RepWeiner." Here's the proof:
Notice how the name RepWeiner is not only the brightest spot, but devoid of spatterings of color? That indicates that specific area -- the name -- has been saved more times than the rest of the image.
Gee, I wonder why?
Gee, I wonder why too!
FAIL Breitbart. Just FAIL
RawStory.com confirms, Breitbart is full of shit.
How do I say EPIC FAIL? How do I count the ways?
    Today, Breitbart has been taunting Weiner via Twitter, claiming that he has "much more" scandalous material to reveal.
     The story was published late Friday night/Saturday morning by an pseudonymous contributor to "Big Government", under the byline "Publius". Breitbart's media enterprises have had serious credibility issues in the past, including questions surrounding the ACORN "sting" carried out by conservative prankster James O'Keefe and the selective editing of a speech by former USDA official Shirley Sherrod.
UPDATE: According to this website's analysis , the screen-grab Breitbart is posting as "proof" is an easily debunked fraud.
More proof of Brietbart's forged screen capture, courtesy of Eileen B
Peace and love to all
You can follow me on Twitter @ JesseLaGreca
Originally posted to MinistryOfTruth on Sat May 28, 2011 at 11:49 AM PDT.
Also republished by Media Reform .
Tags
