For the past seven hours, Senator Paul has been holding the Senate floor!
Submitted by justus1776 on Wed, 05/25/2011 - 20:11
in
UPDATE: Rand Paul's Statement on the Patriot Act Extension
"For the past seven hours, Senator Paul has been holding the Senate floor, keeping Reid and his allies from rushing this bill through the Senate without debate or amendments."
Please give Senator Paul's office a call at 202-224-4343 to thank him for standing up for the American people and the Constitution!
Afterward, please give both of your senators another call through the Capitol Switchboard at 202-224-3121.
Ask them to stand with Rand Paul, the Constitution, and the fundamental liberties that made America great by opposing the rushed extension of these three provisions without debate - and unamended.
Together, we have a great opportunity to make a difference, but I need you all to remain as steadfast and committed to this fight as Senator Paul.
I hope you will stand with Senator Paul and C4L by again contacting both of your senators to oppose the extension of the so-called "Patriot" Act.
In Liberty,
Login or register to post comments
Comment viewing options
Submitted by Paul_S. on Wed, 05/25/2011 - 18:25.
Has a single person been convicted in open court based on secret evidence collected?
Has any of the evidence used for convictions been shown to be critical?
Or are we simply being hornswaggled into believing that it will keep away the bogeyman? Welcome to Monsters Inc.
Besides being unconstitutional regarding the 1st and 2nd Amendment, I see no proof that it enhances security only empirical evidence that it undermines liberties.
Ñ
Submitted by Reggie_R_B on Thu, 05/26/2011 - 06:51.
Letter to Chuck Grassley
As some of your constituents I  am writing to express our   concerns in regards to several things in our government .That   several of my friends and neighbors feel is very alarming and a serious threat to our nation and children's future. I volunteered t...o write and ask for your consideration . The jobs, economy, deficit and inflated prices for food and fuel and the destruction of the dollar are vital concerns to all citizens. Besides those issues we are concerned that our government is implementing the laws on Americans . The  Nazi's used to devastate ,victimize and disarm the people in Germany. I ask you to compare similarities of the patriot act to the Nazi' Enabling act of the 1930's  I would then ask you to read the Nazi's Gun Control law of 1934 and compare to  the US Gun Control act of 1968. Its copied word for word from the Nazi's law. .I would then ask your opinion of the Fema relocation work camps .That have been erected in almost all states that are designed exactly like the concentration camps of Nazi Germany complete with razor wire. Our police are becoming more militant and government has now confiscated more money and property from nonviolent American citizens than the Nazi's did in Germany. All these things are of grave concern affecting the rights, freedom life of American citizens . Knowing from the past , suffering , oppression and misery governments used these as tools to inflict on the people . Land of the Free is now the most imprisoned nation on earth .Our grandchildren are already slaves to the government debt. Government violates and ignores  laws and limits of the constitution . Courts are corrupted by politics and special interests . Examples - The president committed American military to Lybia with out a declaration of war from congress as is required constitution. There is still much suspicion as to whether his birth certificate is forged. The courts refused to hear one of the many filed cases to verify his eligibility  .Anonymous political donations ruled as speech  by the court places every elected office for sale to the highest bidder and takes any voice from the people . The list goes on and on the ATF and the DOJ corruption smuggling guns . All these things at the expense and the oppression of  American citizens . Millions of Americans sacrificed their lives so we could be free from exactly this type of tyranny and abuse by government. We have a responsibility to our children to preserve the rights their ancestors died for them to have .It seems greed and corruption in every level  of government and agency is rampant . There are news broadcasts of marshal law and abusive and covert operations by homeland security. Citizens are concerned  and  with good reason to be. We would be grateful for your consideration of these issues and to provide some insight and your opinion  Sincerely Reggie BrannonSee More
By: Reggie Brannon
