by: RDemocrat
Tue May 24, 2011 at 16:48:00 PM EDT
Despite a continuing problem with unemployment and stagnate wages for those still with a job Republicans in Congress have succeeded in a few things. First, completely ignoring our real jobs crises and the fact that Americans are working harder for less. Secondly, they have succeeded in deflecting the debate from the simple fact that more Americans have less to contribute to the economy which has limited our recovery. Finally, they have succeeded in convincing far too many Americans that our national debt is more important than putting people to work in a desperate attempt to steal away their social safety net and give it away to the wealthy, corporate America and Wall St. However, for these Republicans there is a bitter irony in their arguments.
RDemocrat :: The Bitter Irony of Republican Arguments
You see, while they ignore the real problems that have beset everyday America in lieu of using the debt to steal what little working Americans have left they forget one painful fact. The debt they whine incessently about was run up by them and given away to their enablers even as they asked all of us to sacrifice.
The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities has released an interesting take on our federal budget deficit and our public debt. As it turns out almost all of our federal deficit was caused by failed Republican policies and the easiest way to begin bringing it down is just the thing Republicans refuse to compromise on:
As we've noted, my colleagues Kathy Ruffing and Jim Horney have updated CBPP's analysis showing that the economic downturn, President Bush's tax cuts, and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq explain virtually the entire federal budget deficit over the next ten years. ÊSo, what about the public debt, which is basically the sum of annual budget deficits, minus annual surpluses, over the nation's entire history?
Altogether, the economic downturn, the measures enacted to combat it (including the 2009 Recovery Act), and the financial rescue legislation play a smaller role in the projected debt increase over the next decade. ÊPublic debt due to all other factors fell from over 30 percent of GDP in 2001 to 20 percent of GDP in 2019.
We focus here on debt held by the public, which reflects funds that the federal government borrows in credit markets to finance deficits and other cash needs. ÊThat's the proper measure on which to focus because it's what really affects the economy. ÊWe compare it to GDP because stabilizing the debt-to-GDP ratio is a key test of fiscal sustainability.
As Kathy and Jim note, simply letting the Bush tax cuts expire on schedule (or paying for any portions that policymakers decide to extend) would stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio for the next decade. Ê While we'd have to do much more to keep the debt stable over the longer run, that would be a huge accomplishment.
http://www.offthechartsblog.or...
They even included this handy little chart that explains it in terms even the brainwashed teabag mind should be able to easily understand:
In other words almost half of our debt until 2019 was caused by failed Republican policies that were rubber-stamped by selfish politicians in both parties. Even after these policies were proven for what they are, dismal failures they were continued and allowed to keep costing the average American huge amounts of debt. All the while, those who caused the problems and ran up the debt were given a free pass from sacrifice no matter which party controlled Congress and the White House.
Now, instead of addressing the real problem and ending these costly bottomless pits politicians in both parties have decided to just continue them. Instead of real solutions that would make a real difference they are doing what they do best. They are telling you that YOU must sacrifice again even as they enrich themselves and the very folks who caused our debt to begin with yet again. They are hoping you will allow them to steal away your Social Security, Medicare and any program that helps anyone but them instead.
The only question really left now is are you going to be stupid enough to let them?? You can rest assured they certainly hope you are.
