GOP: Wisconsin is Ground Zero for 2012 as They Double Down on Crazy
May 23, 2011
30
Governor Walker warned Wisconsin Republicans at their annual state convention that they face a huge threat in the looming recall elections, but the Republicans were focused instead on whom to run for a US Senate seat that’s been in Democratic control for over 50 years. Referring to Wisconsin as “ground zero” for 2012, the Republicans stressed the importance of sustaining the radical changes they’ve initiated. In order to do that, they want to take that senate seat, but they’re torn on whom to run: a moderate Republican or double down on the crazy.
Looks like they might not have much of a choice with Club for Growth already weighing in to attack the moderate Republican, former Governor Tommy Thompson, whose great sins include working with unions, pushing for the high speed rail Republicans thumbed their noses at, and saying some good things about the Democratic healthcare reform law (which only makes sense as it implements Republican principles of free market competition).
Meanwhile, it looks like the challenges to the recall campaigns are mostly being rejected, with state election officials recommending that an elections board throw out most challenges to recall efforts against three Republican state senators. If you are a conservative, you would call this “Republican court activism”, but if not, you would simply call it an attempt to stop the bleeding via using the courts to stop democracy. Let us not forget that many of the ways the Republicans attempted to get their agenda passed were not exactly legal. The people don’t like that. It’s not a partisan thing, it’s a democracy thing. Sigh. The recall elections are set for July 12, 2011.
Madison.com reports:
“In many ways, sustaining what we’ve won will make getting here look easy. We must hold on to what has worked,” U.S. Rep. Jim Sensenbrenner said at the convention Saturday. “We’re about to face some of the toughest challenges we as Republicans have ever faced. … That’s because Wisconsin is ground zero in 2012 and we can never forget it.”
…
“Wisconsin Republicans should recruit a pro-growth conservative to run, not recall some big-government, pro-tax Republican whose time has come and gone,” Club for Growth President Chris Chocola said.
….
No matter the Republican candidate, Democrats are confident they have momentum on their side following the explosive first months of Walker’s administration and Ryan’s pushing of a federal budget plan that would replace Medicare with a voucher system.
“There are no real moderates left in that party,” Wisconsin Democratic Party spokesman Graeme Zielinski said. “The moderates are marching in the streets with us. They’re going to end up with an extreme candidate.”
“The Scott Walker-Paul Ryan agenda has gotten so wacky, so out of step with even the moderate Republican political thought, our candidate will be a strong moderate who builds through consensus and will be able to listen to both sides and work with both sides,” he said.
Brothers Scott and Jeff Fitzgerald of FitzWalkerstan fame are considering a US Senate run, which should frighten anyone who values democracy after the brothers gave their father the head of the troopers position and then ordered him to “detain” Democratic lawmakers, an act which has CREW investigating the actions of the troopers.
Poor Governor Walker is begging the GOP to take the recalls seriously, urging them to forget about that dang senate seat for the next two months. The Chicago Tribune reported:
Walker, speaking to about 1,000 Republicans at a Wisconsin Dells resort, said the only thing that could stop the GOP’s momentum in the state are the recall elections. “For the next two months, you shouldn’t think about any United States Senate seat, you should think about protecting six brave senators and picking up three others,” Walker said.
Translation, Walker’s agenda is being severely threatened and if he can’t keep those targeted Republicans, he’s screwed (as if he weren’t already screwed, but Walker isn’t known for his ability to see reality). Walker may not yet have realized that he was nothing but anti-Obama momentum bait for the national GOP. He and Ryan will get the Newt treatment from the poll readers behind the scenes at the same time as they are embraced as the faces of fundamental change in front of those vocal primary voters. Of course, we see that the little Ozmen can’t quite manage their cultists these days, so the Republicans may be forced to double down.
I’m placing my bets on crazy, after all, they admitted that Wisconsin was “ground zero” for the 2012 race (it’s their own analogy, but one has to ask, are they are the terrorists and Wisconsin is the shattered destruction after their attack?) and the GOP seems hell bent on purging itself of any sane moderates. Goodness, if anyone who is for progress and against corporate tax subsidies can no longer be a Republican, if Republicans must repeat the Club for Growth Koch brothers lines about healthcare reform knowing they have no better solution, then the party might as well open the doors to the lunatic asylum and let it rip.
Open the doors, boys. Let Ground Zero attacker Scott Walker to run for President. He’s their perfect puppet: he’s actually uneducated (as opposed to just playing ignorant zealot), he’s a demagogic Dominionist who believes he’s The Chosen,  he’s a known serial cheater with no ethics to speak of, he’s clearly not a reality seeker, and he’s got a sociopath’s penchant for lying.
Let us not forget that while Republicans used the shock and awe of a fake financial crisis to support their politically motivated attacks on unions, Wisconsin is actually facing a 600 plus million dollar surplus, even accounting for Governor Walker’s corporate welfare handouts. Now, we all remember the nice surplus Clinton left Bush and we know how quickly such surpluses are drained down the trickle down toilet of modern day Republican Party ideology, so act fast Wisconsin. Use the Peter Principle to get rid of Walker if you have to; urge him run for President.
By the time the vetting process is done with him, “pallin around with terrorists” will seem like an invitation to Mr. Roger’s Neighborhood and Wisconsin will be one cooked demagogue down. Maybe he can run with Paul Ryan as his VP. They can run on killing Medicare, attacking the middle class, giving huge corporate tax breaks to their puppet masters and saying no to progress. If Ryan won’t run with Walker, I know his soul mate Sarah Palin would deign to allow him to run as her VP. Together they can dodge the lamestream media and the people as they issue mandates from the castle, calling it God’s will for you to starve. And think of the crowns! Haven’t we always been seeking a King and Queen to replace our silly democratic process?
I’m betting on the crazy. This is the modern day Republican Party, after all. A few too many teabags short of sane, they’ll run on the economy and jobs, and then implement the same old tax breaks to the “job creators” fiscal failure they’ve been conning American with for too long.
But back to “Ground Zero” in Wisconsin, Governor Walker says those recalls are vital to his agenda. I think y’all know what to do.
30 Responses to GOP: Wisconsin is Ground Zero for 2012 as They Double Down on Crazy
drsolo on May 23, 2011 at 9:59 am
Even more double down from FitzWalker et al
“State proposal would send $250 million to certified capital companies
Firms would keep 80% of profit, wouldn’t have to repay principal”
Sarah Jones on May 23, 2011 at 10:02 am
Nice. The crazy is stupefying really. Just amazing. Thanks for the link:-)
Hrafnkell Haraldsson on May 23, 2011 at 10:18 am
I guess Wisconsin is their Death Star. Throw all their eggs into one basket of insanity. If they can destroy Wisconsin they can destroy other states. Sadly, they have till Election Day to entrench themselves and destroy democracy in that state, which will make throwing them out in 2012 more difficult.
Sarah Jones on May 23, 2011 at 10:25 am
Hopefully the recalls will go well enough to give some measure of checks on the crazy one, and then there’s his recall…..:-) I think if they dangle the red flag of running for POTUS in front of that clown, he’d be stupid enough to jump off of that cliff. Of course, their party is full of people stupid enough to vote for him too, but I trust the majority of Americans not to like his anti democratic agenda.
Teacher in Cheeseland on May 23, 2011 at 9:46 pm
It’s so extreme a plan, even one of Walker’s lapdogs (Sen. Glenn Grothman) calls it “the most dubious giveaway” he’s ever seen.
novenator on May 23, 2011 at 10:41 am
The Republicans will soon shift from wingnut mode back to attack mode to desperately try to shift the focus back to Obama and hide their extreme agenda.  It is up to everyone to remind folks of what happens when todays Republicans are voted into office.
Sarah Jones on May 23, 2011 at 10:54 am
We must not forget that Snyder ran as a “moderate”. Hello, reality.
Shiva on May 23, 2011 at 10:46 am
running an extreme candidate would be absolutely excellent. I mean everything that many Wisconsinites protested against would be presented again as someone to take a Senate seat. How much ammunition does that give the Democrats and the Republican moderates?
Will Walker ever be reelected? If he is then Wisconsin has serious problems. Will at least two of the Republican senators being recalled? You’d better hope so. Walker and his orchestra are nuts for power. Walker must think that the Koch brothers will take care of him If he is not reelected
Reynardine on May 23, 2011 at 10:51 am
Morning, Shiva. I see you weathered the perilous night. At least you’re not in Joplin.
Shiva on May 23, 2011 at 12:26 pm
LOL yeah I am fine, as long as I have electricity things are good!
Sarah Jones on May 23, 2011 at 10:56 am
Glad you are alright!
Walker could be reelected if WI doesn’t address their election system, which from many reports is not a thriving democracy. But polls tell stories that make election theft more difficult.
Participate in polls, people. Make your voice heard.
Teacher in Cheeseland on May 23, 2011 at 9:44 pm
Regarding recalls, two Republicans look as though they’ll be replaced, and another only won her election by a 2% swing last time.  Regarding Walker, yes, there are those that still worship his policies, but, the longer he’s in office, it appears the more contradictions and lies come out.  I don’t think Wisconsin will stand for that (remember, Walker surprised everyone with the collective bargaining bill).
Shiva on May 23, 2011 at 10:16 pm
Recall Vote July 12 2011 for 3 of them.  Kapanke, Hopper and Olson
Reynardine on May 23, 2011 at 11:35 am
In general, I agree, but get some assurance the poll is genuine. With these self-righteous whack jobs, you don’t know who is making a list.
Reynardine on May 23, 2011 at 11:42 am
I’d add that I did participate in an online survey yesterday, which I got through News Hounds, and I hate to give any cautionary note at all, but yes, I’d be a little careful about phone surveys that you can’t authenticate. The way things are going, I can see someone using those to determine which voters to cage or purge.
Sarah Jones on May 23, 2011 at 12:05 pm
absolutely.
Mark on May 23, 2011 at 12:07 pm
When faced with a tough decision or reality, or when caught in a lie, the GOP/Teatards always double down in rhetoric or crazy.
That’s what they’ll do.
Sarah Jones on May 23, 2011 at 2:28 pm
And then the pundits move to crazy a bit more so as to appear “fair”; hence, Michele Bachmann’s crazy notions about the constitution are left unchallenged (save for Chris Matthews).
alan on May 23, 2011 at 1:00 pm
What folks are overlooking here is that Walker and the WI are building legislation to virtually ASSURE a GOP victory in the future. The Voter Real ID act (which Walker will sign into law this month) makes it very difficult for students, the elderly, and the poor to vote “properly”. In one fell swoop, WI will go from having one of the most liberal and easy voter registrations to one of the most difficult and draconian. There’s also little being said about it places UNHEARD of power in the hands of poll workers, who can refuse a lawful and proper ID out of hand if they “suspect” any problems. The vast majority of the poll workers who so generously give their time to the state are wonderful and and upstanding citizens, but in the very isolated cases of voter fraud (which this law is designed to stop) almost always a poll worker is part of said fraud.
Walker has no love for the state or it’s people. It’s all about setting up his little kingdom for him, his cronies, and his bosses. He will simply do whatever the people with the money tell him to do. I have no doubt that if a wealthy democrat were to offer to buy his support that he’d sell in a heartbeat.
This doesn’t BEGIN to touch on the damage he’s already done to the teachers and educators of WI, or the labor unions who built this state.
Sarah Jones on May 23, 2011 at 2:29 pm
You are absolutely correct. I’ve written about the voter disenfranchisement and the seemingly illegal passage of the bill and the election “issues”. Open ballot bags, no chain of custody, etc.
Basheert on May 23, 2011 at 3:23 pm
Isn’t it against some law to form your own “country” within the US?  Walker is a megalomaniac – he needs to be stopped, cold.
Cleo17 on May 23, 2011 at 1:55 pm
There are actually citizens of Wisconsin who continue to support this monstrosity.
Cleo17 on May 23, 2011 at 1:56 pm
Someone needs to go to Wisconcin and I mean seriously explain exactly to its citiznes what the repubs really mean and what all this means to those citizens who still support this jerk. You people in Wisconsin are defending this man who is about ready to strip you of all your dignity and anything else you hvae.
Shiva on May 23, 2011 at 1:58 pm
you are absolutely right. The Democrats need to really lay into Wisconsin heavily. This wasn’t just about unions, it was about women’s rights and the rights of citizens. I have no idea why the tea party supports Gov. Walker when he flies in the face of everything they have said all this time about the Constitution and taking their country back.
That was all a fraud
Sarah Jones on May 23, 2011 at 2:27 pm
That constitution thingy? They meant the OTHER constitution. The one for the corporations and the Christian Dominionists? Yeah, that one.
Basheert on May 23, 2011 at 3:25 pm
The TeaBigots?  They are being marginalized on a daily basis.  This is a corporatist problem – money buying elections.  The Tea Bigots want one thing…free hoverchairs for everyone.  But don’t touch their Social Security, Medicare or early bird specials at Dennys.
The hypocrisy … is stunning.
Basheert on May 23, 2011 at 3:24 pm
Agree, lots and lots more “what if’s” need to be addressed.  I don’t get how people can like this horrible man.
letterman on May 23, 2011 at 3:30 pm
So they’re finally bringing their international strategy to devastate foreign countries in order to maximize profit home. God bless America.
We can’t say we weren’t warned.
West found ‘common ground’ with serial killer | FEED NEWS on May 23, 2011 at 7:00 pm
[...] GOP: Wisconsin is Ground Zero for 2012 as They Double Down on Crazy [...]
