Arizona plans fence to stop immigration from Mexico - if Americans will pay for it
Written by CAA National on May 20, 2011, 05:07 PM
LOURDES MEDRANO
 
AZ Sen. Steve Smith, right, listens to Sen. Ron Gould during Senate debate at the Arizona Capitol, in Phoenix on April 5, 2011. (AP Photo)
Arizona  was the first state to enact a tough anti-illegal immigration law last  year. Now, it wants to be the first to build its own fence along the  Mexico border.
A law that allows for construction of the fence  goes into effect July 20. The state now needs money – and Arizona Sen.  Steve Smith (R) is counting on the generosity of Americans to make the  project come to fruition.
“Unfortunately, the state is broke and  quite frankly we can’t take on this massive project by ourselves,” says  the senator who sponsored the legislation.
His initial goal is to raise $50 million in donations. “That would be a good, healthy start.”
TAKE ACTION: Tell Congress to END Anchor-Baby Amnesty!
Illegal  immigration---as opposed to lawful,  legal immigration---is damaging  this nation beyond repair. We CANNOT  accommodate MILLIONS more of the  poor, tired and huddled masses from  all the lands of the  world. We  can't afford to keep rewarding millions  of people with lifetime access  to our social services - especially  when they in our country illegally  in the first place!  Select Here and Take Action!
If  the federal government won’t finish its fence along Arizona’s roughly  370 miles of border then the state will, the Republican says. He and his  allies are still trying to figure out the cost of the fence and what it  might look like.
The senator’s goal is to build a contiguous, solid fence “and have the entire border completely and properly secured.”
Federal  estimates put the cost of building a mile of solid border fence at $3  million but Smith says the state will rely on inmate labor and donated  supplies to keep costs down.
Sign up for our daily World Editor's Picks newsletter. Our best stories, in your inbox.
Much  of the border fence is on federal or private land and the state needs  permission to fill in gaps or put in reinforcements. Smith doesn’t  expect much cooperation from the Obama administration, though, so he  plans to negotiate with area landowners. If need be, the state would  build a few miles away from the international marker, he says.
Although  the fence will likely draw new criticism of Arizona from immigrants  rights activists already upset with the state's hardline policies, Smith  expects a positive response from Americans because illegal immigration  affects people beyond Arizona, he says. The state gets the blame for  adopting its controversial immigration law known as SB 1070, but other  states are enacting similar measures to crack down on illegal  immigration, Smith adds.
Like the senator, Republican Gov. Jan  Brewer appealed to Americans to open their wallets on behalf of Arizona.  By late last year, her legal defense fund to help fend off lawsuits  challenging SB 1070 had received more than $3.6 million in mostly online  contributions. As of July 20, Smith also plans to collect donations  through a web site.
