Protecting a Protected Class within the Most Protected Class—Government
Written by Chuck  Rogér on May 13, 2011, 01:17 PM
 
When our small business gets requests for donations from local  charities, youth sports teams, and relief agencies, most requests are  readily approved. Other requests are just as quickly denied if the group  holds beliefs with which we strongly disagree. For example, if the  request comes from a group that directly or indirectly promotes  abortions (e.g. Susan G. Komen Foundation ), we deny the request. There are also requests which require more thought and prayer before a decision is made.
 
Recently, an email came from a woman asking if our company would be a  vendor in Philadelphia at an event sponsored by her group, Federally  Employed Women or FEW .  Rather than going with my gut and denying FEW’s request based solely on  the name of the organization, I decided to do some research. FEW’s website contains the obligatory, touchy-feely causes of “encouraging  diversity,” “enhancing career opportunities,” and “quality of life.” Such phrases are designed to melt the hearts and further mush the brains  of leftists and big government unions. FEW’s homepage states that the  organization is:
[A] private membership organization working as an  advocacy group to improve the status of women employed by the Federal  government. This includes contact with Congress to encourage progressive  [my emphasis] legislation.…
Among other boilerplate “missions,” tucked in FEW’s goals is this  gem: “…it is increasingly important to support legislation that affects  the status of women as a class, whether or not federally employed.” So  FEW not only seems to hold a pink magnifying glass over every decision  made in every agency in the federal government, but the organization  also works at pushing discriminatory legislation even when such  legislation doesn’t cover federally employed women, which FEW deems to  be a “class.” Not surprisingly, there is very little on FEW’s website  about making women better workers or more productive employees.
 
In my response to FEW, I expressed thanks for being invited to  participate in the FEW event, but graciously declined since the event  was not compatible with our corporate philosophy of free markets,  smaller and limited government, few governmental regulations on  business, tariff-free trade, and elimination of crony capitalism in the  form of bailouts or subsidies. By voluntarily supporting government  entities, our company would imply assent with the slow takeover of our  prosperous nation by a government seeking to control the homes, lives,  and companies of citizens.
 
Because FEW’s website propagates the leftist myth that women are a  victim class needing protection, I explained that our company views  negatively those groups that establish a false dichotomy by labeling  some as victims for the purpose of shifting power. Restrictive  membership based on physical or emotional criteria creates artificial  divisions that incite the very animosity and class warfare that such  groups ostensibly intend to prevent. People should be hired, promoted  and fired based on quality of work, attitude, and contributions to the  workplace, not on factors such as gender, over which no one has control.  If there are inequalities, let the invisible hand of the market work  things out.
 
I told the FEW lady that some women may feel “empowered” by belonging  to a group that excludes non-women and I asked if such exclusion is  empowerment or elitism. Not a single member of FEW chose her defining  requirement for membership any more than the males who are excluded.  Members had simply chosen to work for the government. Yet federally  employed men make this same choice.
The word “empowerment” is like the word “nice”: the meaning is  completely dependent on the person using the word, not the person who is  being “empowered.” The meaning of empowerment is implied, not inferred.  In their fairy tale world, left-wingers think that they can eliminate  failure by wishing it away with a magic word. There is no substitute for  the self-esteem that comes from hard work and lessons gleaned from  failure. But this approach would entail something no leftist  tolerates—risk.
 
I closed my response by asking that we work together for change and  not marginalize and exclude the very people with whom we should be  working. I noted:
I haven’t delved too deeply into the philosophy and  mission of FEW, but my guess is that I won’t have to go too far to find  support for abortion, entanglement with the unions and support from  groups that work to dismantle our free market system.
It was only after sending the email to FEW that I came across a whole page in adoration of the Susan Komen Foundation. Abortion is the  sanctissimum sacramentum in the church of leftist ideology. In other  words, there is nothing more important than the “right” to take the life  of an innocent, defenseless human being. Every other “right” or  protected class takes a backseat to abortion in the leftist’s mind.
 
In this instance, our company was able to deny support for a group  whose beliefs differ from our own. In many cases, Americans don’t have  that choice because our government uses a confiscatory tax system to  take our hard-earned money and give it to groups chosen by politicians  no matter how the taxpayers feel about where the tax revenue goes. The  more government grows, the less control we have over the money we earn.
 
I’m sure that there are many decent federal employees, but these same  people would be just as decent if they worked for the private sector.  In fact, our economy would be better off if half of existing government  employees were employed by private-sector producers instead of being  paid by the non-producing government that takes money from the  producers. Less government is better .
This piece was written by Don Ross, and submitted by Chuck Roger. Don is a small business owner who may be contacted at Don.mobile@thetoffeehouse.com .
 
