Texas on the Potomac
Washington news with a Texas accent
Ç House panel considers chemical plant safety proposal by Houston Rep. Gene Green | Main | TxPotomac poll: President Obama and the Texas wildfires È
FEMA: Texas already getting maximum help to fight wildfires
This report was written by Nolan Hicks of the Austin bureau, with additional reporting by Rick Dunham in Washington.
In the week since the federal government denied Gov. Rick Perry Ôs  request to have most of Texas granted major disaster status, leading  Republicans have knocked FEMAÕs decision, leaving the impression  Washington is not assisting the fight against the massive wildfires  plaguing ruralåÊcounties.
It is an impression disputed by officials at the Federal Emergency Management Agency , who awarded Texas its 26th grant Sunday to help cover the cost of fire fightingåÊefforts.
‰ÛÏThis administration, through FEMA, has been working closely with the  state throughout the duration of these fires, and we are supporting the  fire fighting efforts,‰Û? FEMA spokeswoman Rachel Racusen said.
Those 26 grants will reimburse 75 percent of the costs related to  fighting designated fires throughout the state. It is the same  reimbursement rate the state would have received if Gov. PerryÕs request  for major disaster status had beenåÊaccepted.
Gov. Rick Perry (AP photo)
But Texas Republicans scoff at the administrationÕs assertions.
‰ÛÏApproving grants to fight 27 out of more than 7,600 fires isn‰Ûªt responsive, let alone ‰Û÷extremely responsive,‰ÛªÓ said Kevin McLaughlin, a spokesman for Texas Sen. John Cornyn, R-San Antonio. ÒThese claims would be laughable if they weren‰Ûªt so insulting.‰Û?
GOP lawmakers tweaked Obama for declining PerryÕs invitation to visit fire-stricken Texas communities.
ÒSince the fires stretch from one side of the state to the  other, I hope he got a first-hand look at this devastating disaster,Ó Hutchison said. ÒThe president should work with the governor to ensure quick approval of a  disaster declaration application and provide the aid affected counties  need and deserve.‰Û?
Perry says he is Òdismayed that this administration has denied Texans the much  needed assistance they deserve.Ó
Granting a major disaster declaration allows the federal government  to help pay for the costs of reconstruction and direct aid to victims of  the fires. Perry only requested ‰Û÷Category BÕ funding, which provides  reimbursement for the same activities as the fire management grants the  state currently isåÊreceiving.
In his letter to the President, PerryÕs office said that the  wildfires were so bad that major disasters should be declared in 252 of  TexasÕ 254 counties; including Harris, Bexar, Dallas, Tarrant and  TravisåÊcounties.
Perry also wrote that the ‰ÛÏseverity and magnitude‰Û? of the fires  was so great that FEMA should direct other federal agencies to step in  and help run the fire-fighting effort in thoseåÊcounties.
Perry spokeswoman Lucy Nashed said the aid promised by FEMA was insufficient because it only covered  the 26 major fires, not the 9,000 fires the stateÕs application cited in  applying for the aid. She said that Texas had used a nationally  accepted definition to determine that the state should receive a  disaster declaration that would cover the 9,000åÊfires.
Nashed described the definition as ‰ÛÏan unplanned, unwanted, wildland fire; and, basically, a wildland fire is any fire onåÊland.‰Û?
That definition includes no standard for the size or intensity of the  fire, but the standards for receiving federal grants do. To qualify for  federal fire assistance, a state must be demonstrate that it has a  need, such as a threat to lives, homes, government facilities and  economicåÊimpact.
The fires covered by the grants for federal reimbursement constitute  the list of major fires the state has been combating for the past couple  of months, said Kelly King , a spokesman for the Texas Forest Service .
