More Images åÈ
åÊ
Dutch politician Geert Wilders, right, and his lawyer Bram Mosckowicz, centre, are seen during Wilders' trial in Amsterdam on April 15, 2011. Wilders, 47, faced five counts of giving offence to Muslims and of inciting hatred against Muslims and people of non-Western immigrant origin, particularly Moroccans, in numerous public statements since October 2006.
Photograph by: Robert Vos, AFP/Getty Images
OTTAWA ‰ÛÓ Canadians will see the erosion of their cultural values, including freedom of speech, if they continue to follow multicultural policies that are allowing the Islamization of the country, says Dutch politician Geert Wilders.
‰ÛÏMulticulturalism, I‰Ûªm afraid, has been a disaster, but only because it is being used as a tool to promote Islam,‰Û? he said Tuesday evening in a private reception at the National Arts Centre.
The reception, which saw more than 200 people pack the Fountain Room at the NAC, was jointly sponsored by the International Free Press Society and Ottawa-based Free Thinking Film Society. It was part of Wilders‰Ûª three-city tour of Canada that also included stops in London and Toronto. Maverick political activist and media commentator Ezra Levant introduced Wilders as ‰ÛÏthe bravest man in Europe.‰Û?
Wilders has certainly become a hugely controversial figure in Europe, particularly in the Netherlands, where he is the leader of the third most popular political party in the country and is currently propping up a minority government, the Freedom Party, PVV. But he is also being prosecuted ‰ÛÓ some say persecuted ‰ÛÒ for alleged hate speech crimes against Muslims, including referring to the Koran as a ‰ÛÏfascist book‰Û? that promotes ideological views comparable to Adolf Hitler‰Ûªs Mein Kampf and saying that if the Prophet Muhammad were alive today he would ‰ÛÏbe hunted down as a terrorist.‰Û?
Wilders, 47, insists he is not anti-Muslim. Indeed, he has travelled extensively in Muslim countries and claims a solid knowledge of Islam and its holy book, the Koran. He sums up his attitude, saying ‰ÛÏI don‰Ûªt hate Muslims, I hate Islam.‰Û?
He reiterated that attitude Tuesday evening. ‰ÛÏIslam and freedom are incompatible,‰Û? he said, arguing that all the demands for democratic freedom currently embroiling the Middle East will come to nothing unless Arabs ‰ÛÏliberate themselves from Islam (and) reject this evil book, the Koran.‰Û?
Canadians, too, need to liberate themselves from notions of cultural relativism that regard all cultures to be of equal worth. How, he said, can a religious culture that allows honour killing, the genital mutilation of women and the stoning of adulterers be considered as anything other than barbaric.
In Wilders‰Ûª view, Islam is more an ideology than a religion. Unlike Christianity and Judaism, which long ago made their accommodations with the modern liberal secularized world by accepting the separation of church and state, Islam continues to hold religion and politics together. In that sense, Wilder said, Islam is a totalitarian religion.
European leaders are starting to realize this reality, Wilders said, and that multiculturalism has been a failure. Muslim immigrants are refusing to assimilate into or adopt the values of their host countries as their numbers grow. Canadians politicians need to realize the failure of multiculturalism, too.
Wilders, noting that Canadians recently elected a majority Conservative government, said that if Canadians want to conserve their way of life, they need to pressure the Tories to adopt certain policies: curbing immigration from Islamic countries, expelling immigrants who turn to crime, stopping the construction of mosques and closing Islamic schools where, he said, hatred against western values is promulgated.
‰ÛÏIslam is causing most of the problems for our societies because it insists on its own agenda. But Islam has only one goal, and that is the submission, by persuasion, intimidation or violence, of non-Muslims.‰Û?
å© Copyright (c) The Ottawa Citizen
åÊ
