Tweet
Dr. Noam Chomsky is a clever man. He knows how to appeal to his readers without letting on too much that he distorts facts and pretty much hates whatever America does whenever it does it. His piece, "My Reaction to Osama bin Laden's Death", amply demonstrates this, as it bears all the hallmarks of his hubristic, self-righteous, anti-American indignation. It's also embarrassingly thoughtless.
In his op-ed , Chomsky takes issue with the killing of Osama bin Laden, saying,
"There appears to have been no attempt to apprehend the unarmed victim, as presumably could have been done by 80 commandos facing virtually no opposition Ð except, they claim, from his wife, who lunged towards them. In societies that profess some respect for law, suspects are apprehended and brought to fair trial."
Chomsky ignores the government's desire to be accurate. The first reports told of fierce resistance. These were later retracted by the US government, which now claims that the SEALs killed bin Laden when they thought he was lunging for a weapon. Who is Chomsky to say that's not true? Was he there? If the government wanted to hide something, why would they constantly update the story? The Obama Administration is trying to be accurate, not deceptive, and is willing to appear weak and lose some political capital in the process. Now, I'm not an Obama fan, but I do respect that approach. And Chomsky, being an academic, should at least wait to pass judgment on America until more facts are available.
Chomsky blathers on in his piece, of course, saying after the quote above,
"I stress "suspects." In April of 2002 the head of the FBI, Robert Mueller, informed the press that after the most intensive investigation in history, the FBI could say no more than it "believed" that the plot was hatched in Afghanistan, though implemented in the UAE and in Germany."
Chomsky doesn't source his claim that the investigation was the most intense in history (and intense is a subjective word; being a gifted linguist, he knows when to give himself wiggle-room). Moreover, Chomsky is referencing an investigation that occurred nine years ago. A lot has happened in nine years, including a confirmation of guilt by bin Laden himself. In addition, Osama is a known founder of al-Qaida. Chomsky addresses this in the most illogical manner imaginable:
"There is much talk of bin Laden's "confession," but that is rather like my confession that I won the Boston Marathon. He boasted of what he regarded as a great achievement."
No source. Chomsky is passing off pure speculation as solid fact. More importantly, he's willing to doubt an admission of guilt (and one made under no duress!) in bin Laden's favor, while also doubting any and everything the US Government claims. The difference? Doubting the latter, of course, plays into his obsession with imperialism and plays to his radically leftist audience. Doubting the former, well, that's just giving a terrorist his due.
The fact of the matter is this: Chomsky is overwhelmingly anti-American, even when being so requires extreme thoughtlessness. He sympathizes with bin Laden's grievances enough to defend a terrorist who allowed his hatred of America to destroy him so thoroughly that he, bin Laden, was no better than his perception of the "Great Satan".
Bin Laden was a soldier, a commander, and a dangerous man. I would have liked to have seen him put on trial, but at the same time, when you're aiming to eliminate a captain in war, you're not aiming for a trial. You're looking to kill, because that's what war is about: killing. Or, to quote the illustrious Sherman, "War is hell." And why is it hell? Because it requires taking life.
In a final bid to prove his credentials and whip up Leftist fury, Mr Chomsky narrows his sights on the implications of calling the mission "Operation Geronimo".
"The imperial mentality is so profound," Chomsky says, "throughout western society, that no one can perceive that they are glorifying bin Laden by identifying him with courageous resistance against genocidal invaders. It's like naming our murder weapons after victims of our crimes: Apache, Tomahawk...It's as if Luftwaffe were to call its fighter planes "Jew" and "Gypsy.""
On the contrary, naming an operation in honor of a brave Navajo fighter fits the situation perfectly. The US is resisting, through the killing of bin Laden, a fanatical, religious enemy. As for our murder weapons, the comparison is worse than inane, it's pathetic. The Germans had little respect for the Jews during the Nazi era, whereas the appellation of our "murder weapons" connotes respect for a formidable opponent. Oh, and just to be clear, the unjust subjugation of Native American peoples is not "our" crimes, Mr. Chomsky. I had nothing to do with it, and neither did you. But your self-righteous indulgence is a good try. Have a Cuban cigar.
