1772211 Responseshttp%3A%2F%2Fnews.antiwar.com%2F2011%2F05%2F02%2Fsenators-call-for-suspension-of-aid-to-pakistan%2FSenators+Call+for+Suspension+of+Aid+to+Pakistan+2011-05-03+02%3A20%3A15Jason+Ditzhttp%3A%2F%2Fnews.antiwar.com%2F%3Fp%3D17722 to “Senators Call for Suspension of Aid to Pakistan”
Jamal
May 2nd, 2011 at 9:35 pm
SENATORS…, while you at it why dont you suspend billions of dollars in annual foreign aid to ISRAEL where all these problems in Middle East is about…, while you at it suspend billions of dollars in annual aid to Oil companies so people can drive to work…, while you at it suspend billions of dollars in annual aid to Goldman Sachs and others.., and ETC.
Francis
May 3rd, 2011 at 12:13 am
You will certainly conquer with me on this one. Unless your foolish enough, you can't fail to know what's important and lying around you home. These Pakistanis knew exactly were this guy was. He was in proximity of a military training base. Does the government account for it's people and property, if yes then they new the occupants of that particular property.
keltrava
May 3rd, 2011 at 1:04 am
If the CIA knew Bin Laden was in Abbottabad why have the Americans been bombing remote Pakistani villages with the excuse Bin Laden "might" be there.
With all the TV commentary and celebrations has there been a single apology to all the families who have had members killed in the hunt for Bin Laden and the associated wars.
Taken as a whole I find the whole exercise disgusting and no wonder there is probably someone out there planning another 9/11
tomofsnj
May 3rd, 2011 at 3:39 am
It is amazing how Carl and friends immediately want to cut aid to Pakistan but never one word about cutting aid to Israel.  We have troops on the ground which depend on supplies which travel across Pakistan.  We get nothing from aid to israel but somehow that money is sacred.   They hate us for our freedom of course.   Give peace a chance and vote the prostitutes in Congress and the Senate who give money to israel because Israel funds their reelection campaigns.
skulz fontaine
Seems a good idea. Suspend ALL the foreign aid. How about a little "aid" to the American people?
curmudgeonvt
May 3rd, 2011 at 7:02 am
But we don't provide any "strategic" value…we just provide the blood – and we facilitate the Archons by continuing to vote them into office despite knowing they won't represent US.  But we obviously revel in being used as fodder for the elite.
Ira7Epstein
I agree.   Eliminate all foreign aid, including foreign aid to the biggest international welfare queen of all, Israel.
andy
Lets stop all foreign aid.
John_Muhammad
May 3rd, 2011 at 3:55 pm
If we KNEW he was there, why didn't we obliterate the place with cruise missiles or multiple drone strikes or station a couple of AC-130's to start raining fire down on the compound to prep it for the ground troops? The story I'm getting is that our guys may not have even known it was OBL there, that they were just going after yet another 'high value individual'. You'd think the most important raid of the decade would be a little more sexed up for posterity.
I smell a rat, a big one, and this time it's not in Denmark- it's somewhere between the White House and the Pentagon.
Gadfly
May 3rd, 2011 at 4:52 pm
Imagine that Ted Kaczynski (a.k.a. the Unibomber) was wanted by the Canadian government for mailing bombs that leveled the headquarters of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police in Ottowa and then fled across the border into the United States.  Now imagine that the Canadian Government, long an ally of the U.S. responded by sending missiles into several towns in Idaho because the "thought" he might be hiding there.  Then the followed up by sending their own special forces across the border and killed Kaczynski in his home.  Then they accused the U.S. of "knowing" where he was all the time.
How would you feel about that Carl?
JC(safeinoz)
May 3rd, 2011 at 5:58 pm
Most posters on many sites are blaming Pakistan for not letting the US know about OBL, but lets think this out for a moment. The US/CIA have hundreds of agents/operatives throughout AfPak for many years. These 'intelligence' people have many local informants in all areas. So please explain why 'the hell' they could not 'fall over' OBL at least 5 years ago?  How many billions go into a 'great big black hole' each year and the 'best of the best' operatives could not think to themselves, I wonder who's inside that big fortified house over there. If I was an US taxpayer, I would be asking for my money back.
