KD_fiscal conservative June 1, 2011 at 3:15 pm
Buzz, You should take that up with your leadership.  As I’ve explained in detail on here before the legal precedents on “race-based gerrymandering” are very contradictory and vague.  Of-course the “majority-minority” districts must be preserved, but “affirmative action” gerrymandering(districts drawn specifically on race) were deemed unconstitutional.  You’ll see if you sit in on on of these “map drawing parties” the key players will never say “black, white, African-American, minority” and they certainly will never put those words in writing.  Its always, “lets move this group of Democrats.” That will get the maps thrown out fast
But the problem is at least partly the GA-GOP, they could possibly legally defend spreading the black populations.  This would give blacks “more influence” in the repub. districts are Mrs. Tucker is advocating.  But we are not going to see that, instead a few districts will be packed and the surrounding districts will be “bleached” to protect the Republican.  This is advantageous to repubs and black legislators.
The fact is whenever the black population get too high(app. 30+) the repubs., start getting nervous.  As Bishop and other southern Dems have learned, it is nearly impossible to keep the conservative whites and black population happy at the same time.  Politics is so polarizing, on major issues, no matter how you vote, you are going upset one of these two groups.  Vote against health care, the dems get pissed, vote for it, the cons want to throw you out.  The same goes with “cuts”, “tax the rich” and every other major issue.  Also, in politics people like stability and considering spreading out black population could create swing districts, something neither the dems or repubs what.  So all in all, regardless of the VRA or any other legal obligations, this trend of packing districts to protect D and R incumbents will con’t.
slyram June 1, 2011 at 6:35 pm
In my personal opinion, the Georgia delegation of 1990 was more in touch with the African American community because the percentage of AA voters in most congressional district was enough to sway an election.  What’s worst is the current situation where most Blacks are in a few districts outside Atlanta and in one political party.  The delegation would have better vibe with a Black GOP MOC (and I am not GOP) and/or a woman MOC.
African Americans can get good public service from non-Blacks and Whites can get the same from AAs.  The scariest things to me are public officials who choose to ignore large sections of the electorate.  Let’s be honest, the centrists in the Georgia delegation listen to everyone and weigh all sides before voting while the far left and far right have a winner take all mentality.
DTK June 1, 2011 at 7:20 pm
Color me unimpressed with Tucker’s mea culpa. Perhaps I’m cynical, but I think her change of mind has less to do with any racial progress she sees, but rather in her pragmatic desire to see more left-of-center politicians elected to office.
Tucker begins her column by saying she originally supported racial gerry-mandering because she “believed that drawing such districts was a progressive political tactic” that would yield more liberal black congressman, instead of moderate-to-liberal white Southern congressman. But as time went on, she saw that the GOP could game the system by packing these black voters into homogenous districts, thus leaving opportunities for center-right Republicans to pick up seats. Now, she thinks it’s a bad idea, because — surprise — “Republicans now control most state legislatures, providing them a distinct advantage in the re-districting battles that have followed last year’s census.”
Tucker acknowledges that the VRA has been largely responsible for the increase in black representation in Congress, but she is ready to throw the legislation overboard in her desire to see fewer conservative Republicans elected to Congress, even if it means fewer African-Americans in the House of Representatives. I think that’s a perfectly defensible position to take, if you’re more concerned about ideology and policy than racial bean-counting. But to paint her change of heart on the VRA as some sort of plea for political moderation is a stretch. She wants a more liberal Congress and she now realizes that the VRA had the unintended consequence of providing a more conservative one. That’s the real story here.
