Melvin, on May 31st, 2011 at 8:26 pm Said:
America has been engaged in two wars while China has fought no wars — but grown its defense budget by double-digits annually for two decades.
China now possesses submarines, missiles and aircraft sufficient to challenge the United States in the Western Pacific and around the world.
With China’s manpower and Russia’s Nuclear weapons they both are now ready to challenge America,Israel and Nato.
The Prophet Jeremiah was given a prophecy of a Chinese invasion of America in Jeremiah chapter 51:12-14.
Set up the standard upon the walls of Babylon, make the watch strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the ambushes: for the LORD hath both devised and done that which he spake against the inhabitants of Babylon.
O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousness.
The LORD of hosts hath sworn by himself, saying, Surely I will fill thee with men, as with caterpillers; and they shall lift up a shout against thee.
Bill R,
I’ll take that on.
Just as for WW One, the British were belligerents, high on the Australian gold they thought would pay for a war of choice — so, to, they pledged the protection of Poland, with words … Meanwhile, FDR had been actively enticing the Japanese into an attack, having failed to suck in the Germans by violations of neutrality.
You do know the Bismarck was spotted by an American airplane with an American pilot (but a British Crew) “on loan”. And one American warship was lost in ‘helping’ the British against U-boat packs. But the Germans didn’t take the bait
You’re also aware that FDR campaigned for re-election in 1940 on the basis that “I will not send your boys to a foreign war”, even as his Selective Service Act was passed that year. And, according to Sec. Henry Stimson’s diary, ten days before Pearl Harbor, FDR said to him, “We must provoke the Japanese into attacking us.”
Of course, the same technique was used by Wilson, one war back. Campaigning for re-election on the slogan “he kept us out of a frieng war” even as a secret treaty was drawn up by Col. House with the Britiish. Wny? Because they said, “If we lose without your help, your war bonds cannot be repaid.”
So, a little bit of history.
And now, that ‘most powerful in the world’ has spent about ten years in the Graveyard of Empires against some farmers with AK-47s and the beat goes on.
High tech hasn’t even managed to off Gaddalfi, so what good is it?
If you look back at the Revolutionary War, our farmers with muskets brought down the mighty British empire, as it were. Insurgents then won the day. And if America had remembered the wisdom of the Founding Fathers, no WW1 intervention. The European war would have ground to  a stalemate — thus no misguided League of Nations, no Treaty of Versailles which sowed the seeds for  the Weimar experience, which led to the rise of Hitler and WW2.
Steve, on June 1st, 2011 at 10:58 am Said:
Hey, don’t forget about downsizing ort “commitments” to Israel, the care and feeding of which is the primary driver and determinant of our expensive power projection capabilities.
86 those fellows, or just take a realistic view of the US national interests re the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, would probably save a quarter of a trillion a year.
Bill R., on June 1st, 2011 at 11:01 am Said:
An America that chooses to wait until it is attacked in the 21st century would be much more damaged by that attack – which in all likelihood would take the form of weapons of mass destruction – than heretofore. While the myth of the all-powerful Minuteman stands strong in our nation’s civic religion – it is just a myth. The population of British North America stood at 2.4 million people as compared to 6.5 million inhabitants of the British Isles. Could the “mighty British empire” have prevailed ? Perhaps, but only by more effective mobilization of its resources could King George III have put more “boots on the ground” to quash the rebellion. But in reality, American military might does not depend – at least it does not have to depend on raw manpower. That said, the US has very the strong geopolitical advantage of having both superior technology and a strong manpower base, so it is capable of generating an unmatched military force when it is focused on that goal. The Romans dominated their Mediterranean empire with about a quarter million men under arms, the British kept a similar sized army to police a world-wide empire, plus colonial troops. In my view, invoking America’s anti-imperialist past is highly anachronistic, and ignores the facts on the ground. Even a Buchananite “America First” strategy that attempted to limit the strategic concerns of the United States to the Western Hemisphere would be imperialistic in the same sense that the Republican-run governments of the 1920s were imperialistic. One cannot carve up any sphere of influence outside the nation’s sovereign boundaries without incurring that charge. What price imperialism on the cheap ? More than you would wish to pay.
Ben, Okla. City, on June 1st, 2011 at 5:28 pm Said:
I have my own views about where our interests lie.  I would probably restrict it to the Western Hemisphere, the original NATO, Japan, and ANZUS.
But regardless of where we end up.  It needs to be paid for.  And I don’t just mean money, that includes bringing back the draft.  You want Empire?  Suit Up and lock and load.  I’m sick of the fact that we are turning the military into an elite separated from the experience of ordinary Americans.  Why do so many non-veterans give excessive and dangerous deference to the military?…because they know nothing of the military.  They’re just the heroes who go and make our problems go away.  If you want to keep this up: big military commitments, along with programs like medicare, social security, et al….show me the money and let’s raise the taxes to pay for this stuff and at least be intellectually honest.
Leave a Reply
Mail (will not be published) (required)
Website
