ROBAMA: Is It OK for a President to Autopen a Bill Into Law?
May 27, 2011 12:27 PM
With the Patriot Act set to expire last night, President Obama signed legislation extending it -- from France -- as first reported by ABC News .
How did he do that? Using an autopen, of course.
Is that allowed?
Article 1, section 7 of the United States Constitution states: “Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the Senate, shall, before it becomes a Law, be presented to the President of the United States; If he approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it...”
It needs to be “presented” to him, and if he approves it “he shall sign it.”
White House spokesman Nick Shapiro seemed to suggest this was a special circumstance. "Failure to sign this legislation posed a significant risk to U.S. national security,” Shapiro said. “The President directed the use of the autopen to sign it."
Rep. Tom Graves, R-Ga., wrote to the president today questioning whether an autopen is good enough.
“Mr. President, I write to request your confirmation that S. 990, as passed by Congress, was presented to you prior to the autopen signing, as well as a detailed, written explanation of your Constitutional authority to assign a surrogate the responsibility of signing bills passed by Congress into law,” Graves wrote.
To reporters, Graves said the autopen move set a “dangerous precedent.” What if the president is hospitalized and not fully alert, he asked. “Can a group of aggressive Cabinet members interpret a wink or a squeeze of the hand as approval of an autopen signing?”
The Senate’s top Republican Mitch McConnell of Kentucky was asked at a press conference just now if he thought that the use of the autopen would pass legal muster.
“I think that’s a better question addressed to them,” McConnell said. “They did the research and their lawyers apparently advised them that this was permissible. I haven’t looked at the legality of it and therefore don’t have an opinion to express on it.”
In 2005, President George W. Bush was told by his Office of Legal Counsel in the Department of Justice  that he could use an autopen given “the legal understanding of the word ‘sign’ at the time the Constitution was drafted and ratified and during the early years of the Republic. We find that, pursuant to this understanding, a person may sign a document by directing that his signature be affixed to it by another.”
This, the OLC found, was supported by opinions of the Attorney General and the Department of Justice “addressing statutory signing requirements in a variety of contexts. Reading the constitutional text in light of this established legal understanding, we conclude that the President need not personally perform the physical act of affixing his signature to a bill to sign it within the meaning of Article I, Section 7...
“We emphasize that we are not suggesting that the President may delegate the decision to approve and sign a bill, only that, having made this decision, he may direct a subordinate to affix the President’s signature to the bill.”
Bob Olding, president and CEO of Damilic Corp., which owns the autopen trademark, told ABC News that there is nothing super high-tech about the devices, which range in price from $2,000 to $10,000.
“They’re not technical marvels,” Olding said. “There’s nothing particularly leading edge. They started going into production in the ‘30s. It’s based on these simple, well-established mechanical concepts.”
Olding said that “Thomas Jefferson is credited with being the inspiration. If you look at what he’s got and look at one of our machines, you might make the connection. But Jefferson’s device was more a duplicator -- he would sign and then a set of levers would sign another at the same time.” 
 
Image from Monitcello
“The classic autopen is a combination of levers and it has a wheel inside that is like a cam, has lobes on it, and it pushes these levers as it turns and they in turn direct the motion of the pen.”
 
 Image from Damilic
There are security concerns, Olding said.  “We won’t sell to just anybody,” he said. “We get customers who call us up and have a sense of urgency and a big sense of importance... and they scare us. We get people who we’re pretty sure are up to no good. ... We’re just terrified that somebody might use our machines the wrong way so we try to be very careful...”
The use of autopens has generated controversy in the past. In 2004, then-Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld was criticized for using an autopen to sign condolence letters to the families of fallen troops.
Then there’s this exchange from "This Week with David Brinkley" on September 13, 1992:
SAM DONALDSON: The columnist Jack Anderson in many newspapers this morning says that a man named Stephen Goot -- I don't know whether I'm pronouncing it correctly --
 
Vice Pres. QUAYLE: I don't know.
 
Mr. DONALDSON: -- is someone who was a GOP contributor several years ago, went to prison and you intervened to get him sent to a minimum security prison. Is that the -- is that correct?
 
Vice Pres. QUAYLE: I read the article this morning. Someone from my staff asked me about it during this week. I just do not know.
 
Mr. DONALDSON: What do you mean, sir, you don't know?
 
Vice Pres. QUAYLE: I don't know the man. According to the article, he -- I think he suggested that he might have been at one of my fundraisers. I just don't know.
 
Mr. DONALDSON: Are you saying you did not do what Anderson claims you did?
 
Vice Pres. QUAYLE: No, I'm -- I -- no, he -- there's evidently some letter that went out with my name attached to it asking for this gentleman, according to the article and what I've been told.
 
Mr. DONALDSON: Do you sign your mail?
 
Vice Pres. QUAYLE: When I was in the Senate, I tried to sign most of it, but some of it went out without my actual signature.
 
Mr. DONALDSON: So you mean a staff person --
 
Vice Pres. QUAYLE: They call it an "autopen." I just -- Sam, I just don't know.
UPDATE: Former Bush White House press secretary Ari Fleischer says President Bush’s White House did solicit the opinion of the Office of Legal Counsel in 2005 about the use of the autopen to sign legislation but he never used it.
“When necessary, the actual bills were flown to him accompanied by someone from the staff secretary's office for his live signature,” Fleischer recalls. “Thought was given to using the autopen on a ‘minor’ piece of legislation to establish a precedent in case there was ever a legal challenge.  However, it was never done.”
Fleischer says, “I think the Obama Administration is on solid ground, but they are taking somewhat of a risk that the autopen will be challenged in court. Using it for the first time on major legislation carries some risk.”
He adds that he “love(s) the irony of the Obama White House now following Bush's OLC opinions, but that's a different matter.”
-- Jake Tapper and Devin Dwyer
User Comments
You can follow this conversation by subscribing to the comment feed for this post.
"How hard is it to sign a bill yourself? They are setting it up so that somebody besides the president can sign bills. Scary. "
Well, the lobbyists write the bills to begin with.  So, I really think it is up to Congress to do their jobs, as the Presidential veto has historically been used only in exceptional cases.
Fishing for controversy.  You have nothing except for pathetically contrived talking points.
Reminds me of the fake "news" BigGovernment broke about Rep. Wiener, a kerfluffle which will end with Brietbart and company in court claiming that they are "journalists" and that they are not responsible for the variety of fake controversies that they spoonfeed to their mindless followers.  A total shame to report on a hacker attack without mentioning that it was a hacker attack.
Posted by: Blip | May 30, 2011 10:07:38 AM
Posted by: unclemsrgol | May 30, 2011 1:15:18 AM
Good point about presentation.  But the autosigning in a questionable manner is certainly a win-win for President Obama on this bill politically, even if America might lose:
1)  his progressive base (which he so often ignores) hates (or hated, when Bush was president) the Patriot Act and could not care less if its implementation is now tainted;
2) even if the the presentation was invalid, who on earth will question it, politically speaking??  The establishment Republicans love the Patriot Act (it says Rove/Bush at every turn), and although they would love to question Obama's conduct on this, wouldn't dare question or weaken the Act!!  Or do you think the progressives will question it, only to watch the Republicans run to Obama's (i.e., the Act's) defense and further seem to usurp citizen rights?
The RINOs who love power more than freedom got played.  This round:
Obama 1
RINOs 0
Posted by: dave | May 30, 2011 8:59:11 AM
How hard is it to sign a bill yourself? They are setting it up so that somebody besides the president can sign bills. Scary.
Posted by: susan | May 30, 2011 3:48:57 AM
Blip -- the word "he" is now interpreted to be genderless in the Constitution.  That said, the Constitution is quite clear on what must occur for legislation passed by Congress to become law.  It must
a) be presented to the President, and
b) the President must sign the bill.
[we leave out here the possibility that the President failed to sign the bill within 10 days, and Congress remained in session -- for that has no bearing on the current situation]
Do we know that the bill was presented to the President?  We can guess "no" for all that would have been needed in that case would be for the President to sign the presented copy.
There's an instant failure right there, regardless of the propriety of an autosigned copy of the bill.
Moving on to autosigning, the sense of the nation has always been that an autosigned object does not bear the signature of the putative signer -- to understand this, see how Donald Rumsfeld was treated when he tasked to an autopen the signing of letters of condolance to fallen servicepeople.  If you, like Obama, are feeling lucky, you could bet that the Supreme Court would find an autopenned signature on a bill valid.   But given my first point (about presentation) -- I wouldn't bet at all.
Posted by: unclemsrgol | May 30, 2011 1:15:18 AM
"Blip, the US Constitution is the authoritative source regarding this issue, not you. Article 1, Section 7 requires that a bill “be presented to the president of the United States; if he approve he shall sign it.” The word "he" is unambiguous. It doesn't say "autopen" or "robot" or "proxy"."
"He"?  By your strict fundamentalist reading, a female President would be 100% unable to sign a bill into law.
The Constitution does not say that a bill must be signed in "pen" either....  does that mean documents signed in pen are illegitimate?
You are just fishing for some deus ex machina to solve the problem of the Obama Presidency.  First you tried the birth certificate thing.  Then you tried the ACORN thing.  Then you tried novel interpretations of the 14th Amendment.  And now you are in a snit about what kind of pen the president uses....
Just grow up and accept it.  Obama is President.  You can try to put up your crackerjack candidates in 2012....  and if you win, then you win.  But stop trying to destroy him while he is in office.  Show some respect for the office, if you are too small to respect the man.
Posted by: Blip | May 29, 2011 5:30:14 PM
Hey guys give it a rest,,,if you want to complain about serious things..I could see...but this?  How about complaining that women's rights are being taken away by republicans and voting laws are being changed as we speak. Union rights, teacher's rights. killing medicare...these are the things you need to be paying attention to and the fact that the republicans want to have corporations pay less taxes while asking the little guy to pay more.To me,,this is whaat I am concerned about not how he signs a bill.
Posted by: Pataricia | May 29, 2011 9:52:40 AM
Well it's not exactly a good idea for Obama to sign much of anything via his own left hand or robo-pen.
It ends up either being too expensive or is ever so almost unconstitutional (illegal)?
Posted by: Teddy | May 29, 2011 2:08:02 AM
ACTUALLY,, PRESIDENT OBAMA SHOWED HIS ADAPTATION TO EMERGENCY AND WHEN HE IS ABROAD AND THE CAPRICIOUS REPUBLICAN CONGRESSPEOPLE WAIT FOR A TIME TO TRICK HIM. HAD HE NOT SIGNED WITH THE AUTO PEN, NOW THE REPUBLICANS WOULD BLAME HIM, AS USUAL.
FORTUNATELY HE RAN FASTER THAN THEM AND WON THE RACE! WOW, VIVA PRESIDENT BARRY OBAMA, :) LET US ALL RE-ELECT HIM, RA RA RA,
Posted by: Moderate American | May 28, 2011 10:48:43 PM
CONDEMNING THE PATRIOT ACT NOW IS PURE REPUBLICAN CRAP. RATHER, THE MODERATE ADVISE AND COUNSEL PRESIDENT OBAMA IS ORDERING IS TOTALLY DIFFERENT THAN THE HOSTILE BOMBING WAR THAT GWBUSH STARTED AND NEVER COMPLETED.
THE EQUATION HAS CHANGED INTO U.S. AMERICAN AID TO INNOCENT MUSLIMS. THERE IS NO COMPARISON WHATEVER :)
Posted by: Moderate American | May 28, 2011 10:33:54 PM
NO BIG DEAL WITH THE AUTO PEN. ACTUALLY BECAUSE OF THE MILLIONS OF PAPERS OUR PRESIDENTS NEED TO SIGN, THE AUTO PEN WOULD SAVE THEIR TIME AND EXPENSES :) LESS FEDERAL EXPENSES. RATHER IT SEEMS TO ME THE REPUBLICANS ARE STUCK IN THE NINETEEN THIRTIES AND WILL NOT ACCEPT MODERN ADVANCES.
Posted by: Moderate American | May 28, 2011 10:26:08 PM
"There is no precedent for what Obama did and it might be unconstitutional."
Gee Chuck, I hope you were saying that when Bush wanted to do that.  (Google, "WHETHER THE PRESIDENT MAY SIGN A BILL BY DIRECTING THAT HIS
SIGNATURE BE AFFIXED TO IT" for the Bush OLC opinion that your tax dollars paid for.)
What the Bush administration concluded using your tax dollars: "The President may sign a bill within the meaning of Article I,Section 7 by directing a subordinate to affix the President ’s signature to such a bill, for example by autopen."
"The Internal Revenue Service is also unambiguous and doesn't have a sense of humor regarding your signature. If you don't personally sign your tax return, you have committed fraud. Period."
Can you tell me how you "personally sign" an electronically filed tax return without being in (say) D.C. or wherever the return is filed to?  Did you print it and sign it with a fountain pen?  Then surely President can use the same mechanism if you set the bar so low as to compare it to IRS standards.
The autopen is, unfortunately, the least of our problems in Washington.
Posted by: dave | May 28, 2011 7:30:26 PM
Posted by: Blip | May 27, 2011 9:42:02 PM
Blip, the US Constitution is the authoritative source regarding this issue, not you. Article 1, Section 7 requires that a bill “be presented to the president of the United States; if he approve he shall sign it.” The word "he" is unambiguous. It doesn't say "autopen" or "robot" or "proxy".
There is no precedent for what Obama did and it might be unconstitutional. Only the US Supreme Court can tell us for certain.
If you truly believe that an "autopen is basically just a really long pen", ask your banker if you can sign your mortgage loan documents with an autopen. After they have a nice big laugh, they'll tell you no. The Internal Revenue Service is also unambiguous and doesn't have a sense of humor regarding your signature. If you don't personally sign your tax return, you have committed fraud. Period.
And, really, isn't federal legislation just a tad more important than your personal loan or tax return? This particular piece of legislation affects over 311 million Americans. I realize Obama is an enemy of the Constitution but why would he even risk invalidating such a critical bill?
If you think this is of only concern to Republicans, perhaps you should visit Democratic Underground. Many progressives there are not at all comfortable with what Obama did.
Posted by: Chuck | May 28, 2011 6:25:14 PM
"...the irony of the Obama White House now following Bush's OLC opinions"
I see no irony - it's entirely predictable and will happen next month, and the month after that and so on.
Obama is Bush III - and that's the problem in a nutshell.
Posted by: dave | May 28, 2011 2:42:12 PM
Why didn't he take care of business before he left on his tour?
Posted by: Minnie | May 28, 2011 6:09:10 AM
I think every time the GOP brings up another way to slow down or trip up the President they do it.
They are becoming caricatures of a political hack....always interested in making mountains out of every molehill and slowing down the government......
It's pathetic
Posted by: BILLY | May 28, 2011 5:58:41 AM
Why not auto sign. almost every thing else he does is "illegal" and/or unconstitional.
Posted by: JOHN SULLIVAN | May 28, 2011 12:51:34 AM
Not in my playbook.
Posted by: Rick McDaniel | May 27, 2011 11:55:38 PM
Steve S posted "No, it is not ok to do this. The President needs it in his hand to review and sign personally. "
We live in the 21st century now. Ever heard of a PDF or a fax machine (okay, that's an old one invented in the 1850's). Heck, the President could just read it on line. I didn't need to be standing next to you to read YOUR post.
Posted by: Faurtz11 | May 27, 2011 11:03:56 PM
Dumb Republicans!  How dare you question the Annointed one?  (rolling eyes)
Posted by: Dumb republican | May 27, 2011 9:55:08 PM
I think the Republicans are confused about the "Autopen"...  yes, it is a mechanical device, but it cannot sign legislation under its own direction.  There is no risk that the autopen will run around signing everything into law.  The autopen cannot read bills and act on its own accord.
Imagine, for instance, that you wanted to express consent for something, say, a bank transaction....  you had the idea in your head, you could even form the words with your mouth, but the bank asked for a signature.  You look at your hands and think, I cannot sign my consent with my bare hands.  Now imagine that someone had a tool.  A stick.  One end, you manipulate with your hand, and the other end of the stick had some sort of ink on it.  You could use your thoughts to control this stick with your hand and remotely mark the paper.
Now, some among us would say, that remote marking stick does not count because how can we know it's an expression of his will!  Others would say, hey, thanks for signing that with your pen.  We know that your signature signifies something more than your name written in ink, it is intended to demonstrate your intention in a binding way.
An autopen is basically just a really long pen....  on one end, the President indicates his intention, and at the other end, this intention is marked in a legible way in conformity with this intention.
I can't believe the things Republicans get worked up over.
Posted by: Blip | May 27, 2011 9:42:02 PM
you have to understand facts. The radicals and most Democrats had no moral, legal, or ethical problems with the activites of Bush/Cheney. The ONLY issue was that Bush/Cheney were in charge. Now that Obama is the purported President everything is OK: new wars, escalated wars, Gitmo, assassinations, stronger Patriot Acts, surveillance, warrant-less searches, giving guns to Mexican druglords, TSA groping, cameras everywhere, cellphone hacking and tracking, etc.
Posted by: Ed | May 27, 2011 9:37:47 PM
Under Bush, the Left hated/despised the Patriot Act.  Hated it.  Now they're all in - even if it's signed by an "Autopen." The sheep are maching us all over the cliff.
Posted by: Jack | May 27, 2011 9:20:27 PM
Trust me, folks. Were the issue presented to the Supreme Court, the ruling would be that the signature is valid. And it would be one of those rare 9-0 decisions.
Posted by: Fascist Hyena | May 27, 2011 9:16:06 PM
"If you signed your IRS returns with an autopen, the IRS would consider it fraud."
Bull, the majority of people already "sign" their IRS returns electronically. They "sign" for large purchases electronically every second, they "sign" loans and credit applications without signing them with a pen every day.
The President may have a different standard when it comes to bills, but don't use factually incorrect statements to make a point.
If you don't think this is legal, go ahead and sue- that is your right as a citizen. Otherwise, you are just a whiner.
Posted by: Mark | May 27, 2011 8:38:51 PM
That's right DeanBob.  How many things that they were so against during the Bush administration, are they now for?
Posted by: Minnie | May 27, 2011 8:35:12 PM
Le loi, c'est moi.
Posted by: Obummer | May 27, 2011 8:33:03 PM
Another 'I was against it before I was for it'.  Like the anti-war protesters who were protresting agsinst the war while Bush was in office, but now where are they (with a third war to boot)????
Posted by: deanbob | May 27, 2011 6:54:37 PM
TJP612: The things you people say about your President. I didn't vote for and don't much like Dave & Nick here in the UK. But I don't hate them. Your Manchurian Candidate crack is a new low and way beyond anything that could be called reasoned debate. The visceral hatred you guys regularly express is more than a bit scary.
Posted by: Mick | May 27, 2011 6:48:43 PM
An "autopen" for a Manchurian Candidate...Sounds about right.
Posted by: tjp612 | May 27, 2011 6:40:01 PM
-I think it is not OK to Republicans. Nothing Obama does it OK to Republicans. They hate him.-
Almost as much as the Clintons do.  Anyway, he votes the way we and those Congresscritters like Rep. JB want.
Posted by: Jeffrey | May 27, 2011 5:15:29 PM
THELOYALOPPOSITION: You can kid yourself as much as you want by referring to Obama's state visit to the UK as an 'embarrassment tour' but the truth was the exact opposite. Here in the UK the tour is seen by all as something of a triumph. The minor slips that are so important to you were barely noticed here and were of no importance at all. Cheering crowds everywhere. For both Obamas; Michelle was as a big a hit as her husband. One of the BBC reporters summed it up best for me when he said; "Britain has fallen in love with the Obamas."
Posted by: Mick | May 27, 2011 5:15:07 PM
Other presidents have done it and it won't be the last time.  Maybe people think it would be better to fly the bill to Europe or let it expire by not signing it.  He is doing his job representing this country he is not on vacation you can't drop everything and rush back to sign something you can do with technology.  Either way he can't win someone will always find criticism in what he does.
Posted by: chilloutu | May 27, 2011 5:12:05 PM
Grow up they just are putting on a show
anyway. This was going to be the most open
White house, all about liberties, remember those phony promises. And for someone who was against every thing Bush did he sure does embrace the same crap Bush did.
Wars, spending and shoving laws down
the American peoples throat. Glad to see all
his supports try and answer what the difference between the to really are.
Posted by: deadwrestler | May 27, 2011 5:09:33 PM
So many unbelievably stupid conservative responses today, as usual.
So, cut the usual blubber and ginned up rage.
The AUTOPEN is legal.
End of story.
Posted by: bonncaruso | May 27, 2011 5:08:17 PM
The President directed that the Bill be signed using the "autopen" and he had full knowledge of the effect of the signing of that Bill. The Republicans certainly don't want the Patriot Act to expire so I'm assuming that this is just theatrics. The smell test should be if the President personally ordered the affixing of his signature and was he competent to make such a decision at the time. Personally, I think this passes the test and those making issue of it should move on to something productive.
Posted by: Jim | May 27, 2011 5:05:59 PM
It's not like the idiots that voted for Obama's health scam even bothered to read the bill, so why do they even have to bother actual sign the bills now.  The puppets won't even have to show up.  They will just allow lobbyists (who wrote the health scam btw) to both write and sign for our lazy, corrupt pols.  Oh yeah.
Posted by: Football | May 27, 2011 4:50:46 PM
Oh this is perfectly fine....Obama will have more time to play golf and his czars can run thing like any good marxist technocrat.
Posted by: Football | May 27, 2011 4:49:06 PM
I think it is not OK to Republicans.  Nothing Obama does it OK to Republicans.  They hate him.
Posted by: Blip | May 27, 2011 4:45:03 PM
A robot (teleprompter) thinks for Obama so why not a robot to sign for him.
Hey, why not use ONLY robots, thereby eliminating the middleman and saving a LOT of money.
Posted by: Danbury | May 27, 2011 4:39:18 PM
Autopen was OK when used by Republicans but when a Democrat black President uses it, all of a sudden it's not OK? Just wanted to make sure I understood the story.
Posted by: hereticzero | May 27, 2011 4:25:26 PM
I think this is a whole lot of making a mountain out of an ant hill.  Whether the document is in front of him or not, he is signing the document.  He knows what he is signing. This is just splitting hairs.
Posted by: Thomas | May 27, 2011 4:10:37 PM
It's a 'sign' of the times . . .
Posted by: Judy | May 27, 2011 4:05:47 PM
No, it is not ok to do this.  The President needs it in his hand to review and sign personally.  If this was a pressing issue then he should have been at the WhiteHouse instead of in France.  After all, how much does it cost these days to run AirForce One????
Talk about wasteful government spending.
Posted by: Steve S | May 27, 2011 4:05:44 PM
Is it O.K. for a news site to make a flap over nothing?
Posted by: Christine | May 27, 2011 3:55:03 PM
White House spokesman Nick Shapiro seemed to suggest this was a special circumstance. "Failure to sign this legislation posed a significant risk to U.S. national security,” Shapiro said.
When Bush was president didn't the left want to do away with the Patriot Act?
Posted by: Minnie | May 27, 2011 3:41:46 PM
The teleprompter talks for him.  The auto pen signs for him.  I guess he can go golfing.
Posted by: Bob | May 27, 2011 3:41:35 PM
Commentor Chuck is right to compare this to having legal documents such as mortgage loans signed by the actual client. This is why notarizing is crucial for many of them.
The Quayle example is an excellent example of how this instrument can be so detrimental to security.
Posted by: Dianne93101 | May 27, 2011 3:08:42 PM
In this day of electronic technology and legally acceptable "digital signatures", I don't see the issue with using a mechanism to replicate your name on a document of which you've publicly stated you approved. In any cas, if tge personal signature was such a big deal, the Air Force or FedEx could have delivered it to the President for his signature.
Posted by: Publius | May 27, 2011 2:54:46 PM
If Obama hadn't been so preoccupied with running off to Europe (only to make a complete fool of himself...and us...at every turn), he would have finished his work before he left! This is the kind of idiocy that complicates the simplest of tasks.
Posted by: glofish54 | May 27, 2011 2:27:20 PM
It would be a simple mater to design a device that would permit the president to manipulate a pen in one place and have another pen duplicated those motions exactly thousands of miles away. Napoleon used such a device over telegraph lines.
Posted by: Greggw | May 27, 2011 2:18:42 PM
