The Wall Street Journal: The Kucinich Republicans
Off/Trac
Rep. Mike Honda: Lessons learned from Libya
Since the intervention began, there have been a surprising number of calls from politicians — on both sides of the aisle — to end the mission on account of cost.
Republican presidential hopeful Jon Huntsman even joined the chorus last month by agreeing that we should pull back, noting simply that it was “an affordability issue.”
This is deeply troubling to hear from someone seeking to lead the free world. If America cannot “afford” to step up on the international stage to stop tyrants, then who can?
There is no doubt that the United States faces serious fiscal constraints and a need to rein in spending. But there are certain areas where Washington can’t “afford” to be cheap either — the most important being matters of war and peace.
America’s foreign policy in this realm should be driven by its principles, not by its pocketbook.
Anything else would be a betrayal of the country’s nearly 235-year history, during which the United States has built its reputation on one trait above all others: standing up for free states and free people around the globe — even if it means financial sacrifice.
The price tag of sending millions of troops overseas did not keep the United States from stopping Hitler’s advance across Europe. Or from halting North Korea’s invasion of the South. The American conscience found it inconceivable to sit back and do nothing.
In Libya earlier this year, a dictator and long-time sponsor of terrorism brutally took aim at his own people as they protested for greater political freedom. Military intervention was not just an “option.” It was a moral responsibility.
America cannot be penny-wise and pound foolish when it comes to international crises — where the lives of innocent people hang in the balance.
When a neighbor’s house is burning down, next month’s water bill does not cross your mind as you rush across the street with a hose. You take action. If there are financial consequences, you address them later.
That said, the Libyan intervention has had a miniscule impact on America’s fiscal situation — particularly when considered in the context of past military actions.
Adjusted for inflation, World War II cost the United States $4.1 trillion, the war in Iraq cost around $800 billion, and the Korean War cost $341 billion. These were extraordinarily pricey undertakings, there is no doubt.
But the Libyan intervention is not even remotely on the scale of these wars. A closer comparison, in terms of strategic objectives, might be the first Gulf War. Even if the costs of the Libyan intervention quadrupled, it would amount to less than 3 percent of that $102-billion conflict.
Commentator Rich Lowry put it best at National Review: “If the United States goes bankrupt, it won’t be because of Libya, unless we add all eligible Libyans to our Social Security and Medicare rolls, and even then — at a population of fewer than 7 million — it will only augment current trends.”
Lowry also makes the important observation that defense spending as a proportion of GDP has actually been cut in half since the 1960s. The takeaway? “In our long-term fiscal crisis, guns are a pittance compared with all the butter.”
Americans and the rest of the world should be worried that the country’s legacy of responding to calls for help against despots, when few others can or will, is being threatened by a rise in isolationism that is cloaked in such calls for fiscal austerity.
This attitude is the same one responsible for Europe’s retreat from the world stage and corresponding decline in global influence.
Indeed, European leaders have been slashing defense spending and reducing international military commitments for years in the name of balancing budgets. The result is a continent that can barely meet the threats of the 21st century without outside assistance and defense-sharing agreements.
The United States, on the other hand, underwrites global security and does not have the luxury of passing the buck on to others. No other democratic state in the world appears capable of accepting that role. While this is a costly burden, the most prosperous nation on earth can afford to shoulder it.
The United States has the resources — both financially and militarily — to prosecute the conflict in Libya. That is not the issue, nor should it be. Matters of war and peace should not be subject to the same spendthrift targets that we are applying elsewhere in government.
Rather, the question of continuing the intervention should be guided by our values. Does the United States believe that all people deserve to be free? Do we believe it is right to stop oppressors from attacking their own people? And do we believe we should act when called upon for help?
Doing nothing on account of frugality in such situations would be cowardice.
For those who haven’t joined the likes of spineless public figures like Jon Huntsman on this issue — and others calling for a U.S. withdrawal from the intervention — it is time to frame the debate away from the American pocketbook and back toward American principles.
A fair appraisal of those principles should lead to one, inevitable conclusion — and a message that can be sent to all Libyans: We’ve got your backs.
