One giant debt for mankind: U.S. national deficit would reach almost to the moon if piled high in $5 bills
Written by CAA Numbers on May 23, 2011, 02:42 PM
UK DAILY MAIL
Ê
President  Ronald Reagan once famously said that a stack of $1,000 bills  equivalent to the U.S. government's debt would be about 67 miles high.
That  was 1981. Since then, the national debt has climbed to $14.3 trillion.  In $1,000 bills, it would now be more than 900 miles tall.
In $5 bills, the pile would reach three-quarters of the way to the moon.
The  United States hit its legal borrowing limit today and the Treasury  Department has said the U.S. Congress must raise the debt ceiling by  August 2 to avoid a default.
The White House is trying to hammer out a deal with lawmakers to cut federal spending in exchange for a debt-limit increase.
Such  a deal may hinge on negotiations led by Vice President Joe Biden, which  still have a long way to go to close the gap between deeply divided  Democrats and Republicans.
Biden has increasingly been playing  the role of emissary for the White House to Capitol Hill on the budget  battle that threatens to lead the United States to the verge of default.
Republicans are demanding deep spending cuts in return for raising the borrowing ceiling.
TAKEÊACTION: Tell Congress to Cut Spending!
We KNOW Obama and his big-spending allies are bankrupting this country.   We  KNOW their budget proposal is pure FANTASY, and will plunge America    deeper and deeper into debt.
Tell Congress to get serious about spending cuts and stop destroying America's financial future ... Select Here
Biden  will gather together senior lawmakers from both parties tomorrow  afternoon for a third set of talks to hammer out a compromise on  reducing budget deficits.
The vice president's group made a  better start than most observers had expected when it began to meet this  month. But few expect an agreement to come quickly or easily.
'It  is a virtual certainty that this process will go to the absolute last  minute, and then for five minutes longer,' said Alex Brill, a research  fellow at the American Enterprise Institute who worked in President  George W Bush's White House.
Attention has shifted to the Biden  group after talks among a separate negotiating panel -- the 'Gang of  Six' senators -- stalled last week with the departure of Republican  Senator Tom Coburn, a fiscal conservative from Oklahoma.
Some analysts saw the breakdown of the Gang of Six talks as a bleak harbinger for the prospect of a long-term budget deal.
That group, comprised of fiscal experts from both parties, had been working behind the scenes since early this year.
Biden's  panel includes four Democratic lawmakers and two Republicans who are  known more for the clout they wield within their parties than for their  budgetary expertise.
Among the members are Eric Cantor, the No. 2  Republican in the House of Representatives and James Clyburn, the No. 3  House Democrat.
Biden has been a point person within the  administration for relationships on Capitol Hill because of the 36 years  he spent as a Delaware senator.ittee for a Responsible Federal Budget.  'The net worth of Warren Buffet, roughly around $50 billion, could only  cover the deficit for 13 days.'
Most people have trouble conceptualising $14.3 trillion.
Stan  Collender, a budget expert at Qorvis Communications, said the biggest  sum most Americans have ever handled -- in real or play money -- is the  $15,140 in the original, standard Monopoly board game.
The United States borrows about 185 times that amount each minute.
TERRIFYING FACTS
*U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner has said the United States borrows about $125billion per month.
With that amount, the United States could buy each of its more than 300 million residents an Apple Inc iPad.
*In a 31-day month, that means the United States borrows about $4 billion per day.
A stack of dimes equivalent to that amount would wrap all the way around the Earth with change to spare.
*In one hour, the United States borrows about $168 million, more  than it paid to buy Alaska in 1867, converted to today's dollars.
In  two hours, the United States borrows more than it paid France for  present-day Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa and the rest of the land obtained  by the 1803 Louisiana Purchase.
*The U.S. government borrows  more than $40,000 per second. That's more than the cost of a year's  tuition, room and board at many universities.
'That usually gets  their attention,' Doug Holtz-Eakin, who was chief White House economist  under President George W. Bush, said in an email. 'I have two kids, so  every 10 seconds, the feds borrow more than I paid lifetime.'
*The Congressional Budget Office projects the total budget deficit in fiscal 2011 at about $1.4trillion.
'The  net worth of Bill Gates, roughly around $56 billion, could only cover  the deficit for 15 days,' said Jason Peuquet, a policy analyst with the  Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget.  'The net worth of Warren  Buffet, roughly around $50 billion, could only cover the deficit for 13  days.'
