Born 25 April 1949 in Paris
Attended France's prestigious Institute for Political Studies (Sciences Po)
Becomes finance minister in 1997
Loses bid for Socialist Party presidential candidacy to Segolene Royal in 2006
Selected IMF head in 2007
Profile: Dominique Strauss-Kahn
Mr Browne said the allegations had been made by a 32-year-old woman who worked at the hotel, which has been identified as the Sofitel near Times Square. His accommodation there was described by the New York Times as a luxury suite costing $3,000 per night (£1,900).
"We received a call that a chambermaid in a hotel in midtown Manhattan had been sexually assaulted by the occupant of a luxury suite at that hotel, and that that individual had fled," Mr Browne told the BBC.
"The maid described being forcibly attacked, locked in the room and sexually assaulted," he said.
Speaking to Reuters, Mr Browne gave more details on the allegations against Mr Strauss-Kahn.
"She told detectives he came out of the bathroom naked, ran down a hallway to the [suite] foyer where she was, pulled her into a bedroom and began to sexually assault her, according to her account."
"She pulled away from him and he dragged her down a hallway into the bathroom where he engaged in a criminal sexual act, according to her account to detectives. He tried to lock her into the hotel room."
Mr Strauss-Kahn then made his way to the airport but left his mobile phone and other items behind, Mr Brown said.
"It looked like he got out of there in a hurry."
By the time police established that the occupant of the room was Mr Strauss-Kahn, the IMF chief was on board an Air France plane at John F Kennedy airport, about to depart for Paris.
"Our detectives requested of the airport authorities that they stop the plane from leaving, went to the airport and took him into custody," Mr Browne said.
"If our officers had been 10 minutes later he would have been in the air and on their way to France."
The woman has been treated at hospital for minor injuries, said Mr Browne.
'Error of judgement'
Mr Strauss-Kahn ran for the French Socialist Party's presidential candidacy in 2006 but lost to Segolene Royal.
He was appointed managing director of the IMF the following year.
Mr Strauss-Kahn has won praise for his stewardship of the IMF, which he has guided through difficult times including the recent world financial crisis.
Police say the allegations were made by a 32-year-old woman working at the hotel
But in 2008 he was investigated by the IMF board over his relationship with a female member of his staff.
The board ruled his actions "reflected a serious error of judgment" but that the relationship had been consensual. He apologised to IMF staff and his wife, French TV personality Anne Sinclair.
Mr Strauss-Kahn has not yet announced whether he intends to run in the 2012 French presidential elections, but had widely been expected to do so.
More on This Story
