What a surprise!  Another Obama adviser outed as radical, anti-American leftist
May 5, 2011
By Bill Zwerger 3 comments
In what should be a most shocking revelation, but is in reality a now common-place occurrence for the anti-American cabal currently occupying the White House,  Barack Obama’s faith advisor, Eboo Patel, has been exposed as a left-wing radical who believes that American ideals such as freedom, equality, and justice are only “myths.”
According to a report from WND.com , Patel, a Muslim activist, has, like his advisee, close ties to another infamous America hater. That would be none other than Obama biographer Bill Ayers.
Patel replied that his own life story “is much closer to Bill Ayers,” explaining he “grew up in the same hometown” that Ayers did.
Continued Patel: “I was kind of taught the same myths about America, a land of freedom and equality and justice, et cetera, et cetera.”
“And then, when I got to college, I saw people eating out of garbage cans for dinner, and I saw Vietnam vets drinking mouthwash for the alcohol, and I thought to myself, this is not the myth that I grew up with. And, in a way, I was so, I think, immature at that time politically, that all I could do was rage.”
Patel explained how he used religion to channel his rage toward America:
“And it was a faith-based movement that came into my life that kind of directed that rage in a direction far more compassionate and far more merciful.”
Obama’s faith adviser went on to say how he may have joined Ayers’ terrorist group if he was around as an activist in the 1960s.
What a damning statement it is indeed to say that reports such as these no longer come as a surprise to many, and that once again the pro-Obama media is absolutely nowhere to be found in regards to it.
This entry was posted on Thursday, May 5th, 2011 at 10:33 am and is filed under corruption , liberals , media bias . You can follow any responses to this entry through the RSS 2.0 feed.
3 Responses to What a surprise!  Another Obama adviser outed as radical, anti-American leftist
zorro on May 5, 2011 at 10:42 am
This is what happens when the animals take over the zoo, and the rest of us had better be very, very afraid.
Well-loved. Like or Dislike:
