Then-candidate  Barack Obama may have been confused or tired when he reported visiting  57 states during the 2008 presidential campaign , but if a group of liberals in southern Arizona has its way, there will soon be a 51st state. Reuters reports :
A group of lawyers from the Democratic stronghold of  Tucson and surrounding Pima County have launched a petition drive  seeking support for a November 2012 ballot question on whether the 48th  state should be divided in two.
Tensions have long simmered between this faction and the remainder of  the state, which is largely conservative. Those tensions took a turn  for the more heated yesterday when state lawmakers announced a plan to  build a fence along Arizona’s southern border—with or without the  approval and financial backing of the federal government.
The splinter group, which calls itself Start our State, seeks to  split Pima County off into what would become the nation’s 51st state,  tentatively named Baja Arizona.
To earn a spot on the ballot, the plan would require 48,000  signatures. Backers have until July 5 next year to collect that many  names. Even then, the likelihood of succeeding in seceding from Arizona  is extremely remote. Paul Eckerstrom, a Tucson attorney and former Pima  County Democratic chairman, is quoted as acknowledging, that “all the  stars would have to align for this to happen.”
Which is not to say it hasn’t happened before. It has—four times.  Kentucky, the first state to win independent statehood, petitioned for  and was granted a separation from Virginia in 1792. The most recent  state to secede, West Virginia, also broke off from Virginia, during the  Civil War.
As for Baja Arizona, Republican lawmaker Ted Vogt, who represents  about a fifth of Pima County residents, dismissed the breakaway movement  as posturing by disgruntled Democrats who see themselves losing clout  in state politics. Vogt told Reuters, “I don’t think a majority of Pima  County residents want to leave Arizona.”
The ballot measure sought by secession backers would put Vogt’s  assertion to the test. The measure would be nonbinding and would ask  Pima County voters if they supported petitioning lawmakers for  permission to secede. Before secession could occur, the measure would  require separate approval by the Legislature, and by a second, binding  referendum by residents of the proposed state.
If the Legislature refused, organizers could attempt an end run of  the process by invoking a statewide referendum. If both the Legislature  and Pima County voters agreed, then it would be up to the U.S. Congress  to grant Baja Arizona formal statehood.
Related Articles
