Tweet
Horror! Disbelieve! Racist Anglo conservatives are at it again! I can feel the anger brewing already towards my humble article. But stay your anger, reader. If you think scholarships made available exclusively to Hispanics , African Americans , women , etc. is fine, then you cannot logically have a problem with the idea of offering scholarships solely to whites. Before I explain why, allow me to offer some information below to illuminate your minds on this topic.
The group in question is called Former Majority Association for Equality and is based in San Marcos, Texas (I trust the locale is no surprise for readers). Keep in mind that in Texas, non-Hispanic whites contribute to 32% of the population while  Hispanics add 37% . So, Anglo whites are actually a minority in Texas, though they certainly don't have the sanctimonious status associated with minorities elsewhere in the United States. In any case, the association's mission is as follows:
"...Award a $500 scholarship to five individuals that meet or exceed our qualifications on July 4, 2011. Upon achieving this we look forward to giving at least five scholarships for each Spring and Fall semester. Awardees remain eligible for future semesters as long as one's overall GPA exceeds 3.0. Scholarship applicants should be caucasian, male (emphasis added), demonstrate a commitment to education, and substantiate financial need. One obstacle that we immediately anticipate is to not appear racist or racially motivated.  We do not advocate white supremacy, nor do we enable any individual that does. We do not accept donations from organizations affiliated with any sort of white supremacy or hate group. We have no hidden agenda to promote racial bigotry or segregation. FMAE’s existence is dedicated around one simple principle, to provide monetary aid for education to white males who need it."
Now, back to my reasoning.
As a white male from a struggling middle class family, I regularly witnessed women and minority students obtain access to more scholarships and graduate with less debt than their white counterparts. I was happy for these so-called disadvantaged folks, but felt that society had ignored my own need for financial aid simply because I had pasty white, politically incorrect skin. On the other hand, doling out race-based scholarships exclusively to people of color was and is (somehow) not racist. Maybe its because that some perceive many colored folks are economically disadvantaged. To that, I say that there are plenty of disadvantaged whites, too; maybe some perceive these folks to have access to inferior secondary eduction; to that I also say there are plenty of whites in the same boat. Unlike these minorities, however, whites who find themselves economically and educationally disadvantaged have no access to racially based scholarships. Maybe it is because some of their ancestors were racist? And yet, how is that their fault, exactly? Or are all these scholarships available to the 'oppressed' merely to assuage liberals and some conservatives of their banal 'white guilt'? I don't know, and when I was paying (and still am paying) for college, I could not care less. I just wanted to learn and graduate with little debt. What race doesn't?
Personally, I would have it so that no scholarship existed based on race but on academic merit and financial need alone. Yet sense and sensibility are often confused in our Republic, so I doubt such a sane measure will achieve popularity soon. In the meantime, I wholeheartedly embrace FMAE's actions because I know there are a lot of white men struggling to gain an education. Should it matter that they are white? No, but that's an ideal not at all reflected in reality. The result? Caucasian males are forced to pragmatically play a race game. White men need scholarships, too, and for mainly the same reasons minorities do. It is, after all, only fair.
Saul Alinksy, in the closing chapter of Rules for Radicals, warned his progressive ilk that it would be heartless and unwise to ignore the financial and social struggles of whites, particularly their middle class, a warning young Che Guevara fans seem to have missed. So be it. There's no need to wait for them. FMAE does care, and kudos to them for doing so. Here's hoping others follow in their footsteps.
