VIDEO: Weiner admits tweet
POLITICO 44
“To remove all remaining doubt about this situation, I agree with Leader Pelosi’s request that the House Ethics Committee use its authority to begin an investigation.”
The calls by Pelosi and Israel for an ethics investigation dramatically raise the political stakes for Weiner. While Weiner stated repeatedly during an emotional press conference on Monday that he had broken no laws nor violated House ethics rules during his interaction with the women, a probe by the House Ethics Committee could find differently. Under its rules, the Ethics Committee can initiate an investigation under its own authority, without a formal complaint being filed.
And it also could provide Pelosi and other Democratic leaders with enough political cover to call on Weiner to step down. So far, none of his Democratic colleagues have called on him to give up the seat that he first won in 1998.
In a phone conversation with Pelosi and Israel earlier Monday afternoon, Weiner refused to even consider resignation, said Democratic insiders. And he repeated that defiant declaration during his press appearance later that afternoon, even as he admitted engaging in lewd online behavior.
“I am deeply regretting what I have done, and I am not resigning,” the New York Democrat told reporters. “I am deeply sorry for the pain this has caused Huma, my wife, and my family.”
Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) and most other top Republicans have avoided saying anything publicly on the Weiner situation, although House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R-Va.) said Weiner should “come clean” and tell the truth about what happened.
During his often highly emotional press conference, Weiner faced a barrage of questions from reporters over whether any of his contacts were with underage women, whether the contacts were consensual, had he improperly used government resources for these exchanges, and if he thought he should step down over the scandal.
Weiner denied those accusations, saying as far he knew, all of the women were adults and all the photos and sexual exchanges took place on his own time or with his own computer equipment.
“I’ve exchanged messages and photos of an explicit nature with about six women over the last three years,” Weiner admitted. “To be clear, I have never met any of these women or had physical relationships at any time.”
«
