by documemts May 1, 2011 5:02 PM EDT
Oh yeah, this'll work! The Siegfried Line,.... Maginot Line,... The Brewer Fence. LOL!
Reply to this comment
by pasha128 May 1, 2011 5:11 PM EDT
That's the Brewer "phantom" fence built without plans or funding or management. What's the odds the Mexicans have to repossess the fence because like Bush, Brewer's lack of management skills permit the fence to be built inside Mexico instead of inside of Arizona?
by jxknowles May 1, 2011 2:42 PM EDT
A lot of good that will do. Most illegals are probably coming into Arizona from Texas and California anyway, LOL.
Reply to this comment
by WeHappyFew May 1, 2011 12:22 PM EDT
I'm sadly unsurprised with the snarky responses below as they reveal that the posters indeed do not check the provenance of THEIR purchases.
Yes, I'm afraid to own, it does make me feel if not sanctimonious, maybe superior and perhaps a little 'smug'
As for my vehicle it's a many -hand-me-down so I really had no choice in it.An ancient Daimler Sovereign,being that its left hand drive stick shift it is imperative I know my way around the engine.
As for my principles, please do not concern yourself about buying them. Shocking an idea as you may find it, they are not for sale.
Reply to this comment
by WeHappyFew May 1, 2011 1:16 PM EDT
Yes, yes my husband has already informed my I either mean right hand drive or left hand traffic.
by agingfundamentalfemale1 May 1, 2011 11:05 AM EDT
LOL - When I think about We, a big word like "mayonnaise" comes to mind. (We Southerners think large language is a put-on, and try to keep our language simplistic.)
LOL - I had to look up the spelling, but here it is ...sanctimonious...
by agingfundamentalfemale1 May 1, 2011 10:16 AM EDT
by WeHappyFew May 1, 2011 10:04 AM EDT
Speak for yourself '22,
You have no idea absolutely 'fascist' I am about where I spend every single dollar I make. Who benefits,who are the shareholders, where the product is sourced, the tax status and employment record of the company with the exception of my Apple Mac and a percentage of my energy utilities.
It is the duty of every serious patriot.
I will not countenance mindless lip service. I would ask that you refrain from supposing everyone to be as uneducated and unmotivated as you appear to be.
***********************
LOL. You would have to be on patrol 24/7 to accomplish what you say you do, We. No one believes your more patriotic-than-thou attitude. And as for education, everyone has different interests and therefore have different educational backgrounds, so stop with the more-educated-than-thou attitude. You may know a lot of fancy words, but that doesn't indicate that you are any more capable of earning a living or "doing well" than any other person on this blog. Your attitude is very self-serving, but I'm not buying it.
Reply to this comment
by agingfundamentalfemale1 May 1, 2011 10:20 AM EDT
What kind of car do you drive? Have you checked EVERY PART on it to ensure that none were made outside the U.S.? Ford Motor Company has many, many parts made overseas. Honda, on the other hand, a foreign-owned company, makes many of its vehicles right here in the U.S.
If you don't want to "countenance mindless lip service", you had better not dish it out.
by cantankerous22 May 1, 2011 10:41 AM EDT
You nailed it.
Someone else who talks down to Americans in the spirit of our arrogant leader. I'm really getting tired of it.
by luadda22 May 1, 2011 9:02 AM EDT
by WeHappyFew May 1, 2011 7:11 AM EDT
AZ has strict laws for those hiring illegal usually smaller latino subcontractors not the companies and individuals two steps removed indirectly benefitting from illegal labor and subsequently driving the shadow economy with all its attendant problems.
Scratch the surface, people, just for a change.
------------------------------------------------------------------
We, then by your same logic. Every time you go to the store, do you make sure that any produce you buy was picked by the United Farm Workers Union and not illegal workers? If not then you are just as guilty. You are personally the same "two steps removed" and are contributing, just as greatly, to the problem also.
by WeHappyFew May 1, 2011 10:04 AM EDT
Speak for yourself '22,
You have no idea absolutely 'fascist' I am about where I spend every single dollar I make. Who benefits,who are the shareholders, where the product is sourced, the tax status and employment record of the company with the exception of my Apple Mac and a percentage of my energy utilities.
It is the duty of every serious patriot.
I will not countenance mindless lip service. I would ask that you refrain from supposing everyone to be as uneducated and unmotivated as you appear to be.
by luadda22 May 1, 2011 1:20 PM EDT
We, How presumptuous and churlish of you to hypothesize that I am benighted and lack a Doctorate of Pedagogy. In other words "bite me" and your ungracious attitude.
by user000049586849302948603 May 1, 2011 8:32 AM EDT
I'm just wonder how long it will be until they get started. I guess we'll just have to keep checking back, for instance, every time those bigoted clowns are in the news.
Reply to this comment
by WeHappyFew May 1, 2011 6:57 AM EDT
The 2007 Legal Arizona workers act MAY fine, revoke license, and shut down business that INTENTIONALLY or KNOWINGLY employ illegal workers. These sanctions are not absolute and can involve companies repeated violation the statute. Well heck, that leaves a fair old bit of wriggle room for blackmail, discrimination and partisan ship.
Larger companies do not directly employ merely put contracts out to tender. The contractor then subcontracts.
The beneficiaries, in real terms, of the undocumented workforce are assuming none of the risk. As with the individual client of a business providing domestic, pool, gardening services, again, no risk. So no, this act is not solving the problem. It's simply absolving any legal responsibility from those driving the illegal immigrant economy thereby removing any impetus for change
The SCOTUS ruling on test case Chamber of Commerce V Whiting ( due june this year) goes to whether IIRIRA Act 1996 pre-empts this state law. To say Obama is wading in against Arizona is plain ignorant. His role as POTUS is to uphold federal law until amended by government or ruled on by the supreme court .
As for Brewer's shabby attempt at law making, SB 1070, a green law school undergrad could have run a coach and horses through that badly conceived piece of crap. A usual nothing but an empty gesture piece of grandstanding. It directly contravened so many federal laws it was garbage before it hit the printers.
As I said you have to stamp out the market for illegal worker if you are serious about removing the problem.
Reply to this comment
by WeHappyFew May 1, 2011 7:29 AM EDT
It is possible that if some posters possessed more than a 'Adult learner' McDegree in 'Business' (?!) they would have a better conceit of the subtle nuances of law and legislation.
by WeHappyFew May 1, 2011 8:39 AM EDT
As an addendum,
Contrary to the opinions of some bloggers the federal government accepts the E-verify system major flaw is it doesn't address (and in fact exacerbates) the problem of identity theft (often aggravated). The resultant thinking is a push for mandatory fingerprinting and biometrics..................
Deutschland! Deutschland! Uber alles!!
by MacNfries April 30, 2011 9:23 PM EDT
This "fence crap" is nothing but a big Republican sham to make the Arizona citizens THINK the Republicans are trying to control illegal immigration. The Republicans are NOT going to step on the toes of their BIG BUCKS contributors, so they spend money on a useless fence.
If they were REALLY serious about stopping illegal immigration, they would just pass & INFORCE a law making it illegal for any company doing business in Arizona to hire undocumented workers ... End Of Story ... they'd leave and go someplace else.
It's all SMOKE & MIRRORS with these politicians ... wish we could toss the whole lot of 'em in the Grand Canyon and fill it in ... the idiots.
Reply to this comment
by user000049586849302948603 May 1, 2011 12:09 AM EDT
Exactly. Otherwise they would have put some money with this bill to "actually build" the thing. Republicans are all talk.
by WeHappyFew May 1, 2011 7:11 AM EDT
AZ has strict laws for those hiring illegal usually smaller latino subcontractors not the companies and individuals two steps removed indirectly benefitting from illegal labor and subsequently driving the shadow economy with all its attendant problems.
Scratch the surface, people, just for a change.
by slownewsdayo April 30, 2011 8:51 PM EDT
by DJ_Independent April 30, 2011 8:26 PM EDT
Oh I am pathetic? This coming from you. HA. You are pathetic
===========
The depth of wit (or lack thereof) DJ routinely displays is truly astounding.
.
by slownewsdayo April 30, 2011 9:38 PM EDT
Yet another example! Thank you, DJ! Take a bow for the folks!
.
