Green Fantasy Meets Harsh Reality
Scott Connery
Despite some rather daunting technical difficulties, many people including President Obama, are pushing hard to have "alternative energy" take a bigger role in our nation's energy production. In fact, Obama plans to reduce our oil imports by 1/3 and use alternative energy as the main replacement.
Alternative energy may be expensive and in it's infancy, but surely the enlightened hand (and pocketbook) of the federal government can transform these technologies into a mature, reliable, and pollution free power source? Obama, and the Democratic party have made that claim part of their party platform .
In fact, they say alternative energy will give us energy independence and create up to 5 million jobs in the process. Lofty claims indeed.
A few weeks ago, I presented an analysis of green energy. In it I argue that the main problem with alternative energy ever working is not cost but energy density. Make no mistake cost is currently a massive problem, but perhaps it won't always be. Even if solar panels and wind farms were free, they simply take up too much space per kilowatt produced to be a useful answer.
Well, let me present the story of the Los Angeles Community College District. It demonstrates the problems I've pointed out in spades. It also points out how Democrats will pick their ideological goals over things like math or reality any day of the week.
The various community colleges of LA spent a little under eight million dollars annually on electricity. That seems like a lot right? And it was probably icky coal that provided most of it. How embarrassing for the green disciples in city hall.
Larry Eisenberg approached them with a vision. A glorious shining green vision. For a mere 975 million dollars, he could take them off the grid. Let's stop and do some quick math here. 975/8=121 Hmmm....121 years to break even assuming no extra maintenance or replacement costs. Most solar panels are guaranteed for 20 or 30 years, so we can safely assume that idea won't pan out.
Private companies (you know the ones who care if ideas actually make financial sense) rarely take on projects with a payback period longer than seven years.
To make matters worse, an engineering consultant said Eisenberg had underestimated costs. He predicted that it would actually take 1.9 billion dollars leading to an astonishing 237.5 year break even point assuming no added maintenance or replacement costs. Think about that for a second. The City of LA signed off on a 1.9 billion dollar project that couldn't conceivably break even until the year 2247.
Eventually, the project was scrapped, but not before 10 million dollars were wasted. As a reminder of their shame, they have a wind generator that won't even power a 60 watt light bulb under normal conditions, and a few carports covered with solar panels.
Remember whenever someone (particularly a politician) starts promoting "alternative energy" make sure you look at the facts. And make sure you don't vote for liars. If they will lie about something as easily checked as energy production, imagine what they will do behind closed doors.
Ê
