Florida Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz, who also happens to be the Chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, recently chided Republicans for wanting to make illegal immigration a crime.
Read NewsBusters story here .
Little ole’ me has a news flash for the brilliant, I’m sure, Congresswoman. Coming into the United States illegally is already a crime. Yes, that’s right! That’s why it’s commonly called illegal immigration and the perpetrators are called illegal immigrants. I’m sure that those two terms are in the process of being sanitized by the PC Gods, but the facts still remain the facts.
Read Heritage Foundation piece on the subject here .
Another giveaway that illegal immigration is illegal is the fact that for the most part, illegal immigrants try their best to hide their immigration status. In fact, dishonest politicians like Shultz and McCain have often expressed their dismay about these people (illegals) having to ‘live in the shadows.’ That’s when they’re not out protesting, that is.
Another infuriating talking point that Schultz is quoted using in the NewsBusters piece is the old “backbone of the economy” line.
“We have 12 million undocumented immigrants in this country that are part of the backbone of our economy and this is not only a reality but a necessity. And that it would be harmful – the Republican solution that I’ve seen in the last three years is that we should just pack them all up and ship them back to their own countries and that in fact it should be a crime and we should arrested them all.”
Many of us realize that Congresswoman Schultz and her fellow Democrats have little to no respect for the American citizen taxpayer, but to say that illegal immigrants who perform menial labor and don’t pay any taxes are the backbone of the American economy is utterly disgraceful. I’m not only picking on poor Ms. Schultz; other charlatans like John McCain and Michael Bloomberg have often used the same nauseating line. No Congresswoman Schultz, illegal immigrants are not the backbone of the American economy. Working Americans, entrepreneurs/small business owners and corporations are the backbone of the United States economy!
Congresswoman Schultz also uses a standard DNC talking point (aka lie) when referring to the supposed Republican desire to have illegal immigrants go back home. No Ms. Schultz, we don’t need to round anyone up (unless they’ve been arrested for a crime) and ship them back home. Instead, we need to pass some simple common sense laws that would make them go home voluntarily and get back in line if they really want to live in the United States. For example: Employers and landlords need to be held accountable and punished if they hire and house illegal immigrants. When these illegal invaders have no work and no place to live, they’ll go back home. It’s really not that much of a difficult fix when you remove all of the various agendas of the illegal immigrant supporters.
In reality, all Congresswoman Schultz and her Democrat associates really care about is getting a steady stream of long-term votes. They need these votes to finally transform America from a free-market economy into a Socialist/Marxist economy, once and for all. They need these extra 50 to 100 million votes to make sure that there is only one political party in America with only one political ideology. They need poor ignorant people who are more than willing to perpetually suck on the giant nipple of the United States government. Never mind what happens when the milk runs dry!
Schultz is either a total ignoramus, or, she just doesn’t care that her children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren will not have the same quality of life that she and her wealthy husband currently enjoy. Marxists like Schultz have absolutely no concern for the damage their policies will do on future generations. They are Godless scoundrels who believe that the ends always justify the means when it comes to their dark atheistic worldview. On their deathbeds these people are quite peaceful knowing that they did everything they could to tear down American values and Capitalism as they slip into eternal nothingness.
