It is a time of fear in the face of freedom, a time of barricaded roads and new paths. Maps fade and direction is lost as we glance sideways at the strange lands through which we pass, knowing for certain only that our destination has disappeared. We are unready to meet these times but we proceed nonetheless, adapting as we wander, reshaping the Earth with every tread. Gone are the old times, the standard times, the high times. Welcome to the irregular times.
Roll Call: How Tea Party in House voted on Patriot Act, May 2011
posted 28th May 2011 in Homeland Insecurity , Legislation , Liberty , Politics by Jim Cook
A number of politicians running for Congress in 2010 were endorsed by the organizations Tea Party Express and FreedomWorks (which refers to itself as “Tea Party HQ”).  Dozens of politicians elected to the U.S. House of Representatives chose to join the Tea Party Caucus as official members.
Reflecting the rhetoric of the broader Tea Party movement, Tea Party Express, FreedomWorks and the Tea Party Caucus each proclaim themselves to be organizations dedicated to constitutional government.  If we take these declarations seriously, then we should expect members of Congress associated with these three Tea Party organizations to cast votes against bills that subvert the United States Constitution .
This week, that expectation was put to the test when the House voted 250-153 to renew the USA Patriot Act for four years without making any reforms whatsoever to its vast search and surveillance powers, which operate below the standard of probable cause warrants specified by the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution.  Defenders of constitutional government in deed, not just in rhetoric, should have voted NO.
The following members of the House of Representatives were endorsed by Tea Party Express, endorsed by FreedomWorks, and/or joined the Tea Party Caucus in the 112th Congress.  Here’s how they voted this week on passage of the Patriot Act without reforms:
Tea Party members of Congress who voted YES on Patriot Act reauthorization, May 26 2011
