ItÕs virtually a cliche that Hollywood is the embodiment of cultural Marxism and exclusion of conservatives (see Ò Navigating Hollywood: Conservatives and Christians Need Not Apply Ò). Now a new book, Primetime Propaganda: The true Hollywood story of how the left took over your TV , promises to provide a great deal of detail and juicy anecdotes on Hollywood and the Left.
In the following video clip, Leonard Goldberg notes that liberalism in the TV industry is ‰ÛÏ100 percent dominant, and anyone who denies it is kidding, or not telling the truth.‰Û? When asked if politics are a barrier to entry, Goldberg says, ‰ÛÏAbsolutely.‰Û?
ThereÕs the familiar sense of moral and intellectual superiority:
Friends co-creatoråÊMarta Kauffman says that when she caståÊCandace Gingrich-Jones, half-sister of Republican former House SpeakeråÊNewt Gingrich, as the minister of a lesbian wedding, ‰ÛÏThere was a bit of ‰Û÷fuck you‰Ûª in it to the right wing.‰Û?
Kauffman also acknowledges she ‰ÛÏput together a staff of mostly liberal people,‰Û? which is another major point of Shapiro‰Ûªs book: that conservatives aren‰Ûªt welcome in Hollywood.
Maybe that‰Ûªs because they‰Ûªre ‰ÛÏidiots‰Û? and have ‰ÛÏmedieval minds.‰Û? At least that‰Ûªs whatåÊSoapandåÊGolden Girls creatoråÊSusan Harris thinks of TV‰Ûªs conservative critics.
However, the ranks of dumb right-wingers has dwindled, according to Harris, whose video has her saying: ‰ÛÏAt least, you know, we putåÊObama in office[!!], and so people, I think, are getting ‰ÛÒ have gotten ‰ÛÒ a little bit smarter.‰Û?
Ah yes, a sure sign of intelligence is voting for HollywoodÕs preferred candidate. And now that Obama is president, we are all the wiser for it.
Advertisement
Hollywood discriminates against conservatives and is proud of it:
Nicholas Meyer being asked point-blank whether conservatives are discriminated against in Hollywood. ÒWell, I hope so,Ó he answers. Meyer also admits his political agenda foråÊThe Day After, aåÊ TV movie he directed for ABC that was seen by 100 million people when it aired in 1983.
ÒMy private, grandiose notion was that this movie would unseat Ronald Reagan when he ran for re-election,Ó Meyer says
Note: 100 million viewersĞa vast audience when compared to the comparatively åÊminuscule numbers that read sites like this.
Not surprisingly, producers acknowledge promoting the homosexual agenda and drug use. Particularly chilling is Òpresident of MTV Networks Entertainment GroupåÊDoug Herzog talking about his network having ‰ÛÏsuperpowers‰Û? when it comes to its influence over young people.Ó Even a passing familiarity with MTV shows its agenda of promoting multiculturalism, miscegenation of White girls with super cool Black males, drug use, and recreational sexuality.
Another obvious truth is that Jews run Hollywood. (See, for example, Edmund ConnellyÕs Ò Rick Sanchez on Jewish Media Power Ò). Virtually all the names mentioned in the linked article are Jewish, including the author, Ben Shapiro. Interestingly, Shapiro is a conservative who managed to get all these frank admissions by flagrantly calling attention to his liberal credentials: Being Jewish and sporting a Harvard Law hat was enough to get their confidence.
‰ÛÏMost of them didn‰Ûªt Google me. If they had, they would have realized where I am politically,‰Û? he said. ‰ÛÏI played on their stereotypes. When I showed up for the interviews, I wore my Harvard Law baseball cap ‰ÛÓ my name is Ben Shapiro and I attended Harvard, so there‰Ûªs a 98.7 percent chance I‰Ûªm a liberal. Except I happen not to be.‰Û?
I suppose we should be thankful for small things like getting a yet another picture of Hollywood and the left. Nothing new hereĞthe topic has been well covered even in the academic literature (see, e.g.,åÊ here , here, p. 48ff and Edmund ConnellyÕs work ( here , here , here , and here ). But it shows once again the critical importance of media control in the media age. We donÕt have it; they do. ThatÕs why theyÕre winning.
Share:
