By Monte Solberg ,QMI Agency
First posted:
Tweet
A new Conservative majority government is now safely installed in Ottawa. A shiny new cabinet has been sworn in, the first step towards being sworn at.
As a conservative, this electoral success invites the question, what next? Obviously the Conservative Party will begin implementing their election platform which certainly has about it a savoury hint of conservatism. But the hint leaves me wanting more.
If I had to sum up where the government should go with its majority, I would say they should help Canada become far more lean, mean and green.
For starters, the Tories should embrace the elegance of lean by paring government spending that isn’t effective. Clearly they needed this advice before they assembled a new cabinet of, ahem, 39 people.
Forget about doing this just to balance the budget. Programming and services that don’t provide more value than those same dollars in the hands of businesspeople, workers and investors is, by definition, wasteful. Savings from that paring away could help us prepare for the demographic wave of the soon-to-be retired. That’s conservative prudence.
To encourage growth and job creation, personal income tax and capital gains rates should be reduced and regulations slashed. That’s a conservative stimulus plan.
When I talk of being mean, I’m talking about the good mean, the chivalrous mean. I’m suggesting the government make it clear that it won’t tolerate intolerance. In other words, if you think it’s OK to murder your own wife, daughter or sister in the name of your ugly religious beliefs, then I hope you don’t think I’m too mean if I suggest that you go to jail and never get out.
A liberal democracy can handle rejection of any kind except the rejection of laws that affirm our equal freedom.
We must also further sharpen our edge as a military force. We may be preparing to withdraw from Afghanistan, but we must not withdraw from equipping our fighting men and women. We will need to call on them again, perhaps sooner rather than later. Conservatives know that eternal vigilance really is the price of freedom.
When I talk about being green, I’m talking about conservation in the conservative sense. It is a principle of conservatism that life should be lived in a proper balance and that we have obligations to others. One of those obligations is to be good stewards of the land and show respect for nature. The government needs to continue to harness the important work of groups like the Nature Conservancy and Ducks Unlimited.
In other words, as we grow the economy we should also look for ways to protect and even enhance our environment. For instance, switching large fleets of trucks to run on natural gas instead of diesel would clean up our air and give truck drivers a reprieve from high fuel costs. Ducks Unlimited wetlands projects sequester carbon and clean the water, which ranchers then use for their livestock. That’s conservative conservation.
In my view, a Conservative majority is also a precious resource. If it’s used wisely, there’s no reason why it can’t also be a renewable resource.
Reader's comments »
By adding a comment on the site, you accept our terms and conditions and our netiquette rules .
Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
Sponsored Links
